---
title: Swiss-Prot release 27.0
categories: sp-major
---

                        SWISS-PROT RELEASE 27.0 RELEASE NOTES


                                   1. INTRODUCTION

       1.1  Evolution

       Release 27.0  of SWISS-PROT  contains 33329 sequence entries, comprising
       11'484'420 amino acids abstracted from 32314 references. This represents
       an increase  of 5.6% over release 26. The recent growth of the data bank
       is summarized below.

       Release    Date   Number of entries     Nb of amino acids

       3.0        11/86               4160               969 641
       4.0        04/87               4387             1 036 010
       5.0        09/87               5205             1 327 683
       6.0        01/88               6102             1 653 982
       7.0        04/88               6821             1 885 771
       8.0        08/88               7724             2 224 465
       9.0        11/88               8702             2 498 140
       10.0       03/89              10008             2 952 613
       11.0       07/89              10856             3 265 966
       12.0       10/89              12305             3 797 482
       13.0       01/90              13837             4 347 336
       14.0       04/90              15409             4 914 264
       15.0       08/90              16941             5 486 399
       16.0       11/90              18364             5 986 949
       17.0       02/91              20024             6 524 504
       18.0       05/91              20772             6 792 034
       19.0       08/91              21795             7 173 785
       20.0       11/91              22654             7 500 130
       21.0       03/92              23742             7 866 596
       22.0       05/92              25044             8 375 696
       23.0       08/92              26706             9 011 391
       24.0       12/92              28154             9 545 427
       25.0       04/93              29955            10 214 020
       26.0       07/93              31808            10 875 091
       27.0       10/93              33329            11 484 420

       1.2  Source of data

       Release 27.0  has been  updated using protein sequence data from release
       37.0 of  the PIR (Protein Identification Resource) protein data bank, as
       well as translation of nucleotide sequence data from release 36.0 of the
       EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database.

       As an  indication to  the source  of the sequence data in the SWISS-PROT
       data bank we list here the statistics concerning the DR (Database cross-
       references) pointer lines:

       Entries with pointer(s) to only PIR entri(es):            4553
       Entries with pointer(s) to only EMBL entri(es):           4557
       Entries with pointer(s) to both EMBL and PIR entri(es):  23557
       Entries with no pointers lines:                            662



    <PAGE>




          2. DESCRIPTION OF THE CHANGES MADE TO SWISS-PROT SINCE RELEASE 26


       2.1  Sequences and annotations

       About 1532 sequences have been added since release 26, the sequence data
       of 213  existing entries  has been  updated and  the annotations of 3000
       entries have  been revised.  In particular we have used reviews articles
       to update  the annotations  of  the  following  groups  or  families  of
       proteins:

       -  Aspartate and glutamate racemases
       -  Bacteriophage T4 proteins
       -  Band 3 anion proteins
       -  Beta amylases
       -  Cysteine synthases
       -  Deoxyribonuclease I
       -  Epenymins
       -  Epimorphin family
       -  GTP1/Obg family
       -  Fork head domain proteins
       -  G-linked receptors family 2
       -  Glutamate 5-kinase
       -  HIT family
       -  Lysyl oxidases
       -  mutT domain proteins
       -  Nitrilases / cyanide hydratase
       -  Peripherin / rom-1
       -  Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases
       -  Pollen proteins Ole e I family
       -  Prokaryotic transglycosylases
       -  Protein prenyltransferases alpha subunit repeat
       -  Renal dipeptidases
       -  Trehalases



       2.2  A special emphasis on four "model" organisms

       We have selected four organisms that are the target of genome sequencing
       and/or mapping projects and for which we intend to:

       -  Be as  complete as  possible. All sequences available at a given time
          should be  immediatly included  in  SWISS-PROT.  This  also  includes
          sequence corrections and updates.
       -  Provide a high level of annotations.
       -  Cross-references to specialized database(s) that contain, among other
          data, some  genetic information  about the  genes that code for these
          proteins.
       -  Provide specific indices or documents.






    <PAGE>



       The four organisms selected are:

       o  Caenorhabditis elegans (worm)
       o  Drosophila melanogaster (fly)
       o  Escherichia coli
       o  Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast)

       Such a  special effort  has been  going on  for more  than  a  year  for
       Escherichia coli  (thanks to  a very  fruitful  collaboration  with  Ken
       Rudd), it  has started  in this  release for  yeast: about 300 new yeast
       sequences were  entered; about  1500 entries  were reannotated and a new
       document (YEAST.TXT)  is provided  that list yeast entries in SWISS-PROT
       classified by  gene name  and synonym(s).  The next  release will target
       C.elegans thanks  to a collaboration with the group at the Sanger Genome
       Center in  Hinxton (UK).  The Drosophila  "project" should  start a  bit
       later.

       Organism          Database                 Index file
                         X-referenced             provided
       --------------    ----------------------   --------------
       C.elegans         WormPep                  Next release
       D.melanogaster    Flybase                  In preparation
       E.coli            EcoGene                  ECOLI.TXT
       S.cerevisiae      LISTA (in preparation)   YEAST.TXT


       2.3  The Expasy World-Wide Web server

       The recent months have seen a tremendous increase in the availability of
       software tools  and applications  that allow  to efficiently make use of
       the varied  resources which  are part  of the Internet network. Three of
       these  `Network   Information  Tools'  (NIR)  are  widely  used  by  the
       biological community:  WAIS (Wide  Area Information Server), Gopher and,
       more recently,  the World-Wide  Web (WWW). As many organizations provide
       WAIS or  Gopher servers  that offer access to SWISS-PROT and PROSITE, we
       felt that  there was  no need to set up ourselves such a service. But no
       such server was yet available for WWW.

       The World-Wide Web (WWW), which originated at CERN, is a powerful global
       information  system   merging  networked   information   retrieval   and
       hypertext. It  gives access, using hypertext links, to the documents and
       information contained  in all the existing WWW servers around the world,
       as well  as to  the data  obtainable through other information retrieval
       systems like WAIS, Gopher, X500, etc. To access a WWW server, one has to
       run on a local computer a client program (a WWW browser), which displays
       hypertext documents.  The user  can then either request a keyword search
       or jump  to another  document by following a hypertext link. WWW has the
       outstanding advantage  of extending  the hypertext  model to  the  whole
       world (by allowing hypertext jumps to documents anywhere on the internet
       network) and  by being  device and  user-interface independent (browsers
       exist for  a variety  of computers  and user-interfaces,  including Unix
       workstations  running  XWindows,  MacIntoshes  and  PCs  with  Microsoft
       Windows).




    <PAGE>



       A WWW  server has  been set  up by  Ron Appel  from the  group of  Denis
       Hochstrasser at  the Faculty of Medicine of the University of  Geneva on
       the ExPASy  molecular biology  server. It allows access, using the user-
       friendly hypertext  model, to  the SWISS-PROT and SWISS-2DPAGE databases
       and, through  any SWISS-PROT  protein sequence entry, to other databases
       such as  EMBL, PROSITE,  REBASE, Flybase,  PDB and OMIM. Using a browser
       which is  able to  display images  one can  also remotely access 2D gels
       image data from SWISS-2DPAGE.

       A WWW  server can  be accessed  on  the  internet  through  its  Uniform
       Resource Locator  (URL), the addressing system defined by the WWW model.
       The URL for the ExPASy molecular biology WWW server is:

                 http://expasy.hcuge.ch/

       or

                 http://129.195.254.61/

       To access a WWW server, you need to run a browser (or client) program on
       your local computer. Browsers exist for a variety of machines and may be
       obtained by  anonymous ftp. Here is a selected list (taken from the CERN
       WWW server)  of currently  available browsers  and the  ftp address from
       which they can be retrieved:

       NCSA Mosaic    a very  flexible and  powerful browser  with a  graphical
                      user interface. Available for Unix boxes using X11/Motif;
                      for Mc  Intoshes and  for Microsoft  Windows.  FTP  site:
                      ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu (in /Web/xmosaic).

       lynx           a full screen browser for vt100s using full screen, arrow
                      keys, highlighting,  etc. FTP site: ftp2.cc.ukans.edu (in
                      /pub/lynx).

       www            a basic  line mode  browser giving access to WWW from any
                      dumb terminal. FTP site: info.cern.ch (in /pub/www).



       To access  all the  data available  from SWISS-2DPAGE,  the user's local
       computer needs  to run  an image  viewing program.  For most browsers on
       Unix workstations  the default  program is  xv, a  shareware application
       developed by John Bradley at University of Pennsylvania. The program can
       be found by ftp at export.lcs.mit.edu (in /contrib).

       For more  information on  the ExPASy  WWW server, please contact Dr. Ron
       Appel:

            Email: appel@cih.hcuge.ch
            Tel: +41-22-372 62 64
            Fax: +41-22-372 61 98






    <PAGE>



       2.4  Changes in the DR line

       We have  added cross-references  to the  WormPep collection of candidate
       protein translations  from the  Caenorhabditis elegans genome sequencing
       project (see  section 2.2  of these  notes). These  cross-references are
       present in the DR lines:

       Data bank identifier: WORMPEP
       Primary identifier  : Cosmid-derived name  given to that protein by the
                             C.elegans genome sequencing project.  In  general
                             this name will not change.
       Secondary identifier: Number  attributed   by  the   C.elegans   genome
                             sequencing project  to that protein.  This number
                             will change when the sequence is updated.
       Example             : DR   WORMPEP; ZK637.7; CE00437.


       2.5  Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT

       Since release 24, we provide weekly updates of SWISS-PROT. These updates
       are available by anonymous FTP. Three files are updated every week:

       new_seq.dat    Contains all the new entries since the last full release.
       upd_seq.dat    Contains the entries for which the sequence data has been
                      updated since the last release.
       upd_ann.dat    Contains the  entries for  which one  or more  annotation
                      fields have been updated since  the last release.

       Currently these  files are  available on  the  following  anonymous  ftp
       servers:

       Organism       EMBL ftp server
       Address        ftp.embl-heidelberg.de (or 192.54.41.33)
       Directory      /pub/databases/swissprot/new

       Organism       ExPASy (Geneva University Expert Protein Analysis System)
       Address        expasy.hcuge.ch  (or 129.195.254.61)
       Directory      /databases/swiss-prot/updates

       Organism       National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
       Address        ncbi.nlm.nih.gov (or 130.14.20.1)
       Directory      /repository/swiss-prot/updates

       !! Important notes !!!

       Although we  try to  follow a  regular schedule,  we do  not promise  to
       update these  files every  week. In some cases two weeks will elapse in-
       between two updates.

       Due to  the current  mechanism used  to build a release the entries that
       are provided in these updates are not guaranteed to be error free. Also,
       for the  same reason,  new  entries  do  not  contain  an  OC  (Organism
       Classification) line.




    <PAGE>





                                3. ENZYME AND PROSITE

       3.1  The ENZYME data bank

       Release 14.0  of the  ENZYME data bank is distributed with release 27 of
       SWISS-PROT. ENZYME  release 14.0  contains information  relative to 3489
       enzymes.



       3.2  The PROSITE data bank

       3.2.1  What's new in release 11.0

       Release 11.0  of the PROSITE data bank is distributed with release 27 of
       SWISS-PROT.  Release  11.0  contains  715  documentation  chapters  that
       describes 926  different patterns.  Since  the  last  major  release  of
       PROSITE (release  10.00 of  December 1992),  80 new  chapters have  been
       added and  306 chapters  have been  updated. The new chapters are listed
       below:

       -  Protein splicing signature
       -  CAP-Gly domain signature
       -  MAM domain signature
       -  Prokaryotic transcription elongation factors signatures
       -  MCM2/3/5 family signature
       -  XPGC protein signatures
       -  Bacterial regulatory proteins, arsR family signature
       -  Bacterial regulatory proteins, deoR family signature
       -  Dps protein family signatures
       -  Ribosomal protein L27 signature
       -  Ribosomal protein L36 signature
       -  mutT domain signature
       -  3-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase signature
       -  Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase signatures
       -  Alanine dehydrogenase and pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase
       -  Lysyl oxidase putative copper-binding region signature
       -  6-hydroxy-D-nicotine oxidase and reticuline oxidase FAD-binding
       -  Cytochrome c oxidase subunit VB, zinc binding region signature
       -  Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase signatures
       -  Glycine radical signature
       -  Uroporphyrin-III C-methyltransferase signatures
       -  Protein prenyltransferases alpha subunit repeat signature
       -  Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signatures
       -  Glutamate 5-kinase signature
       -  Guanylate kinase signature
       -  ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase signatures
       -  2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetases signatures
       -  Deoxyribonuclease I signatures
       -  Glucoamylase active site region signature





    <PAGE>




       -  Trehalase signatures
       -  Glycosyl hydrolases family 8 signature
       -  Prokaryotic transglycosylases signature
       -  Renal dipeptidase active site
       -  Serine proteases, ompT family signatures
       -  Proteasome B-type subunits signature
       -  Signal peptidases II signature
       -  Cytidine & deoxycytidylate deaminases zinc-binding region signature
       -  GTP cyclohydrolase I signatures
       -  Nitrilases / cyanide hydratase signatures
       -  Orn/DAP/Arg decarboxylases family 2 signatures
       -  Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase signatures
       -  Alpha-isopropylmalate and homocitrate synthases signatures
       -  Beta-eliminating lyases pyridoxal-phosphate attachment site
       -  Dihydroxy-acid and 6-phosphogluconate dehydratases signatures
       -  Prephenate dehydratase signatures
       -  Cysteine synthase pyridoxal-phosphate attachment site
       -  Cys/Met metabolism enzymes pyridoxal-phosphate attachment site
       -  Cytochrome c and c1 heme lyases signatures
       -  Aspartate and glutamate racemases signatures
       -  Mandelate racemase / muconate lactonizing enzyme family signatures
       -  Phosphoglucomutase and phosphomannomutase phosphoserine signature
       -  D-alanine--D-alanine ligase signatures
       -  Carbamoyl-phosphate synthase subdomain signatures
       -  Nickel-dependent hydrogenases b-type cytochrome subunit signatures
       -  Adrenodoxin family, iron-sulfur binding region signature
       -  ABC-2 type transport system integral membrane proteins signature
       -  Acyl-CoA-binding protein signature
       -  LacY family proton/sugar symporters signatures
       -  Sodium:alanine symporter family signature
       -  Sodium:galactoside symporter family signature
       -  Osteopontin signature
       -  Peripherin / rom-1 signature
       -  Interleukins -4 and -13 signature
       -  Erythropoietin signature
       -  Galanin signature
       -  Chaperonins clpA/B signatures
       -  Bacterial type II secretion system protein D signature
       -  Bacterial type II secretion system protein F signature
       -  MARCKS family signatures
       -  Elongation factor 1 beta/beta'/delta chain signatures
       -  Eukaryotic initiation factor 4E signature
       -  Calsequestrin signatures
       -  GTP1/OBG family signature
       -  HIT family signature
       -  Ependymins signatures
       -  Epimorphin family signature
       -  Yeast PIR proteins repeats signature
       -  Oleosins signature
       -  Pollen proteins Ole e I family signature
       -  Hypothetical YCR59c/yigZ family signature




    <PAGE>




       3.2.2  Future developments

       Starting with  the next  major releases (12.0 of May 1994), PROSITE will
       be extended  to include  weight matrices (also known as profiles). There
       are a  number of  protein families  as well  as functional or structural
       domains that  cannot be  detected using  patterns due  to their  extreme
       sequence divergence.  Typical examples  of important  functional domains
       which are  weakly conserved  are the immunoglobulin domains, the SH2 and
       SH3 domains,  or the  fibronectin type III domain. In such domains there
       are only  a few sequence positions which are well conserved. Any attempt
       of building  a consensus  pattern for  such regions  will either fail to
       pick up  a significant  proportion of the protein sequences that contain
       such region  (false negative)  or will pick up too many proteins that do
       not contain  the region  (false positive). The use of technique based on
       weight matrices  or profiles  allows the  detection of  such proteins or
       domains. Dr.  Philipp  Bucher  at  ISREC  in  Lausanne  and  myself  are
       collaborating to  include such  methods into PROSITE. This collaboration
       also includes  other participants such as Roland Luethy (AMGEN), Michael
       Gribskov (SDSC)  and Steve  Altschul (NCBI).  If you  are interested  in
       participating in this project please contact Philipp Bucher at:

                              pbucher@isrec-sun1.unil.ch

       We will  include in  the next  release note of SWISS-PROT (Release 28 of
       February 1994)  a brief  description of the PROSITE syntax extension for
       profiles. The full description will be available in the User's Manual of
       release 11.1 of PROSITE (February 1994).

       Important notice  for software  developers: the  integration of profiles
       into PROSITE  will not  "break" the current format. The profiles entries
       in the  PROFILE.DAT file  will be  tagged with the token "MATRIX" on the
       "ID" line  (currently, only  "PATTERN" and "RULE" are used as tokens); a
       new line-type "MA" will be used in these entries to store all the weight
       matrices specific  parameters. The  format of  the PROFILE.DOC file will
       not be changed.



                                4. WE NEED YOUR HELP !

       We welcome  feedback from our users. We would especially appreciate that
       you notify  us if  you find  that sequences  belonging to  your field of
       expertise are  missing from  the data  bank. We  also would  like to  be
       notified about  annotations to be updated, if, for example, the function
       of a protein has been clarified or if new post-translational information
       has become available.










    <PAGE>



                             APPENDIX A: SOME STATISTICS



       A.1  Amino acid composition

            A.1.1  Composition in percent for the complete data bank

       Ala (A) 7.66   Gln (Q) 4.02   Leu (L) 9.20   Ser (S) 7.09
       Arg (R) 5.23   Glu (E) 6.26   Lys (K) 5.81   Thr (T) 5.83
       Asn (N) 4.45   Gly (G) 7.04   Met (M) 2.35   Trp (W) 1.30
       Asp (D) 5.27   His (H) 2.25   Phe (F) 3.99   Tyr (Y) 3.22
       Cys (C) 1.78   Ile (I) 5.55   Pro (P) 5.03   Val (V) 6.52

       Asx (B) 0.005  Glx (Z) 0.005  Xaa (X) 0.02


            A.1.2  Classification of the amino acids by their frequency

       Leu, Ala, Ser, Gly, Val, Glu, Thr, Lys, Ile, Asp, Arg, Pro, Asn, Gln,
       Phe, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp



       A.2  Repartition of the sequences by their organism of origin

       Total number of species represented in this release of SWISS-PROT: 4143

            A.2.1 Table of the frequency of occurrence of species

            Species represented 1x: 1879
                                2x:  685
                                3x:  387
                                4x:  247
                                5x:  186
                                6x:  143
                                7x:   88
                                8x:   78
                                9x:   76
                               10x:   48
                           11- 20x:  151
                           21- 50x:  103
                           51-100x:   33
                             >100x:   39













    <PAGE>





            A.2.2  Table of the most represented species


        Number   Frequency          Species
             1        2530          Human
             2        2376          Escherichia coli
             5        1563          Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
             4        1496          Mouse
             5        1385          Rat
             6         654          Bovine
             7         579          Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
             8         495          Bacillus subtilis
             9         489          Chicken
            10         369          African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis)
            11         341          Salmonella typhimurium
                       341          Rabbit
            13         311          Pig
            14         251          Vaccinia virus (strain Copenhagen)
            15         224          Maize
            16         200          Bacteriophage T4
            17         193          Human cytomegalovirus (strain AD169)
            18         190          Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse-ear cress)
            19         183          Vaccinia virus (strain WR)
            20         180          Rice
            21         166          Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                       166          Tobacco
            23         164          Pea
            24         162          Wheat
            25         155          Caenorhabditis elegans
                       155          Fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
            27         138          Barley
            28         133          Soybean
            29         131          Slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum)
            30         130          Spinach
            31         129          Staphylococcus aureus
            32         127          Sheep
            33         119          Marchantia polymorpha (Liverwort)
            34         118          Rhodobacter capsulatus
            35         117          Dog
            36         114          Pseudomonas putida
            37         111          Neurospora crassa
            38         110          Klebsiella pneumoniae
            39         104          Bacillus stearothermophilus












    <PAGE>





       A.3  Repartition of the sequences by size



                   From   To  Number             From   To   Number
                      1-  50    1966             1001-1100      321
                     51- 100    3345             1101-1200      199
                    101- 150    4723             1201-1300      156
                    151- 200    3191             1301-1400       97
                    201- 250    2804             1401-1500       86
                    251- 300    2469             1501-1600       44
                    301- 350    2289             1601-1700       46
                    351- 400    2377             1701-1800       37
                    401- 450    1780             1801-1900       43
                    451- 500    1933             1901-2000       31
                    501- 550    1325             2001-2100       13
                    551- 600     922             2101-2200       40
                    601- 650     645             2201-2300       48
                    651- 700     488             2301-2400       16
                    701- 750     475             2401-2500       18
                    751- 800     368             >2500          100
                    801- 850     270
                    851- 900     293
                    901- 950     182
                    951-1000     189




       Currently the ten largest sequences are:


                                RYNR_RABIT  5037 a.a.
                                RYNR_HUMAN  5032 a.a.
                                APB_HUMAN   4563 a.a.
                                APOA_HUMAN  4548 a.a.
                                RRPA_CVMJH  4488 a.a.
                                DYHC_TRIGR  4466 a.a.
                                GRSB_BACBR  4451 a.a.
                                PLEC_RAT    4140 a.a.
                                POLG_BVDV   3988 a.a.
                                VGF1_IBVB   3951 a.a.













    <PAGE>



                             APPENDIX B: ON-LINE EXPERTS



       B.1  List of on-line experts for PROSITE and SWISS-PROT


    Field of expertise            Name               Email address
    ---------------------------   ------------------ ----------------------------
    Alcohol dehydrogenases        Joernvall H.       hans.jornvall@k1m.ki.se
                                  Persson B.         bengt.persson@embl-
                                                     heidelberg.de
    Aldehyde dehydrogenases       Joernvall H.       hans.jornvall@k1m.ki.se
                                  Persson B.         bengt.persson@embl-
                                                     heidelberg.de
    Alpha-crystallins/HSP-20      Leunissen J.A.M.   jackl@caos.caos.kun.nl
                                  de Jong W.         u629000@hnykun11.bitnet
    Alpha-2-macroglobulins        Van Leuven F.      fred@blekul13.bitnet
    AA-tRNA synthetases class II  Leberman R.        leberman@frembl51.bitnet
    Apolipoproteins               Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    AraC family HTH proteins      Ramos J.L.         jlramos@cnbvx3.cnb.uam.es
    Arrestins                     Kolakowski L.F.Jr. kolakowski@helix.mgh.
                                                     harvard.edu
    Asparaginase / glutaminase    Gribskov M.        gribskov@sdsc.edu
    ATP synthase c subunit        Recipon H.         recipon@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    Band 4.1 family proteins      Rees J.            jrees@vax.oxford.ac.uk
    Beta-lactamases               Brannigan J.       jab5@vaxa.york.ac.uk
    Beta-transducin family        Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    C-type lectin domain          Drickamer K.       drick@cuhhca.hhmi.columbia.
                                                     edu
    Chalcone/stilbene synthases   Schroeder J.       raf@sun1.ruf.uni-freiburg.de
    Chaperonins cpn10/cpn60       Georgopoulos C.    georgopo@cmu.unige.ch
    Chaperonins TCP1 family       Willison K.R.      willison@icr.ac.uk
    Chitinases                    Henrissat B.       bernie@cermav.grenet.fr
    Clusterin                     Peitsch M.C.       peitsch@ulbio1.unil.ch
    Cold shock domain             Landsman D.        landsman@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    CTF/NF-I                      Mermod N.          nmermod@ulys.unil.ch
                                  Gronostajski R.    gronosr@ccsmtp.ccf.org
    Cytochromes P450              Holsztynska E.J.   ela@netcom.uucp
                                                     netcom!ela@apple.com
    DEAD-box helicases            Linder P.          linder@urz.unibas.ch
    Deoxyribonuclease I           Peitsch M.C.       peitsch@ulbio1.unil.ch
    dnaJ family                   Kelley W.          kelley@cmu.unige.ch
    EF-hand calcium-binding       Cox J.A.           cox@sc2a.unige.ch
                                  Kretsinger R.H.    rhk5i@virginia.bitnet
    Elongation factor 1           Amons R.           wmbamons@rulgl.leidenuniv.nl
    Enoyl-CoA hydratase           Hofmann K.O.       khofmann@biomed.biolan.uni-
                                                     koeln.de
    Fatty acid desaturases        Piffanelli P.      piffanelli@jii.afrc.ac.uk
    fruR/lacI family HTH proteins Reizer J.          jreizer@ucsd.edu
    GATA-type zinc-fingers        Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    GDT/GTP dissociation stimul.  Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov





    <PAGE>




    GltP family of transporters   Hofmann K.O.       khofmann@biomed.biolan.uni-
                                                     koeln.de
    Glucanases                    Henrissat B.       bernie@cermav.grenet.fr
                                  Beguin P.          phycel@pasteur.bitnet
    Glutamine synthetase          Tateno Y.          ytateno@genes.nig.ac.jp
    G-protein coupled receptors   Chollet A.         arc3029@ggr.co.uk
                                  Attwood T.K.       bph6tka@biovax.leeds.ac.uk
                                  Kolakowski L.F.Jr. kolakowski@helix.mgh.
                                                     harvard.edu
    GTPase-activating proteins    Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    HIT family                    Seraphin B.        seraphin@embl-heidelberg.de
    HMG1/2 and HMG-14/17          Landsman D.        landsman@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    Inorganic pyrophosphatases    Kolakowski L.F.Jr. kolakowski@helix.mgh.
                                                     harvard.edu
    Integrases                    Roy P.H.           2020000@saphir.ulaval.ca
    Kringle domain                Ikeo K.            kikeo@genes.nig.ac.jp
    Lipocalins                    Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
                                  Peitsch M.C.       peitsch@ulbio1.unil.ch
    lysR family HTH proteins      Henikoff S.        henikoff@sparky.fhcrc.org
    MAC components / perforin     Peitsch M.C.       peitsch@ulbio1.unil.ch
    Malic enzymes                 Glynias M.         mglynias@ncsa.uiuc.edu
    MAM domain                    Bork P.            bork@embl-heidelberg.de
    MIP family proteins           Reizer J.          jreizer@ucsd.edu
    Myelin proteolipid protein    Hofmann K.O.       khofmann@biomed.biolan.uni-
                                                     koeln.de
    Pancreatic trypsin inhibitor  Ikeo K.            kikeo@genes.nig.ac.jp
    PEP requiring enzymes         Reizer J.          jreizer@ucsd.edu
    pfkB carbohydrate kinases     Reizer J.          jreizer@ucsd.edu
    Phytochromes                  Partis M.D.        partis@gcri.afrc.ac.uk
    Plant viruses icosahedral     Koonin E.V.        koonin@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    capsid proteins
    Protein kinases               Hanks S.           hanks@vuctrvax.bitnet
                                  Hunter T.          hunter@salk-sc2.sdsc.edu
    PTS proteins                  Reizer J.          jreizer@ucsd.edu
    Restriction-modification      Bickle T.          bickle@urz.unibas.ch
                enzymes           Roberts R.J.       roberts@neb.com
    Ribosomal protein S15         Ellis S.R.         srelli01@ulkyvm.bitnet
    Ring-cleavage dioxygenases    Harayama S.        sharayam@ddbj.nig.ac.jp
    Signal sequence peptidases    von Heijne G.      gvh@csb.ki.se
                                  Dalbey R.E.        rdalbey@magnus.acs.ohio-
                                                     state.edu
    Sodium symporters             Reizer J.          jreizer@ucsd.edu
    Subtilases                    Brannigan J.       jab5@vaxa.york.ac.uk
                                  Siezen R.J.        nizo@caos.caos.kun.nl
    Thiol proteases               Turk B.            turk@ijs.ac.mail.yu
    Thiol proteases inhibitors    Turk B.            turk@ijs.ac.mail.yu
    TNF family                    Jongeneel C.V.     vjongene@isrecmail.unil.ch
    TPR repeats                   Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    Transit peptides              von Heijne G.      gvh@csb.ki.se
    Type-II membrane antigens     Levy S.            levy@cellbio.stanford.edu
    Uracil-DNA glycosylase        Aasland R.         aasland@embl-heidelberg.de





    <PAGE>




    Vitamin K-depend. Gla domain  Price P.A.         pprice@ucsd.edu
    XPGC protein                  Clarkson S.G.      clarkson@cmu.unige.ch
    Xylose isomerase              Jenkins J.         jenkins@frira.afrc.ac.uk
    WAP-type domain               Claverie J.-M.     jmc@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    ZP domain                     Bork P.            bork@embl-heidelberg.de


    African swine fever virus     Yanez R.J.         ryanez@cbm2.uam.es
    Bacteriophage P4              Halling C.         chh9@midway.uchicago.edu
    Caenorhabditis elegans       Sonnhammer E.      esr@mrc-molecular.biology.
                                                     cam.ac.uk
    Chloroplast encoded proteins  Hallick R.B.       hallick@arizona.edu
    Drosophila                    Ashburner M.       ma11@phx.cam.ac.uk
    Escherichia coli              Rudd K.            rudd@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    Salmonella typhimurium        Rudd K.            rudd@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    Snakes                        Stocklin R.        stocklin@cmu.unige.ch




       B.2  Requirements to fulfill to become an on-line expert

       An expert  should be  a scientist  working with  specific famili(es)  of
       proteins (or specific domains) and who would:

       a) Review the  protein sequences in SWISS-PROT and the patterns/matrices
          in PROSITE relevant to their field of research.
       b) Agree to  be contacted  by people  that have obtained new sequence(s)
          which seem to belong to "their" familie(s) of proteins.
       c) Have access  to electronic  mail and be willing to use it to send and
          receive data.

       If you are willing to be part of this scheme please contact Amos Bairoch
       at the following electronic mail address:

                                 bairoch@cmu.unige.ch




















    <PAGE>




               APPENDIX C: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN BIOMOLECULAR DATABASES

       The current  status of the relationships (cross-references) between some
       biomolecular databases is shown in the following schematic:


                                                           **********************
                            ***********************        * EPD [Euk. Promot.] *
                            *  EMBL Nucleotide    * <----> **********************
                            *  Sequence Data      *
    ******************      *  Library            *        **********************
    * FLYBASE        * <--> *********************** <----- * ECD [E. coli map]  *
    * [Drosophila    *                ^         ^          **********************
    * genomic d.b.]  * <------+       |         |
    ******************        |       |         +--------- **********************
                              |       |                    * TFD [Trans. fact.] *
                              |       |         +--------> **********************
                              |       |         |
    ******************        v       v         v          **********************
    * REBASE         *      ***********************        * ENZYME [Nomencl.]  *
    * [Restriction   * <--- *  SWISS-PROT         * <----- **********************
    *  enzymes]      *      *  Protein Sequence   *            |
    ******************      *  Data Bank          *            v
                            ***********************        **********************
    ******************       ^  ^  |  |  ^   ^  |          * OMIM   [Diseases]  *
    * EcoGene/EcoSeq *       |  |  |  |  |   |  +--------> **********************
    * [E. coli]      * <-----+  |  |  |  |   |
    ******************          |  |  |  |   +-----------> **********************
                                |  |  |  |                 * ECO2DBASE     [2D] *
                                |  |  |  |                 **********************
    ******************          |  |  |  |
    * PROSITE        * <--------+  |  |  +---------------> **********************
    * [Patterns]     *             |  |                    * SWISS-2DPAGE  [2D] *
    ******************             |  +---------------+    **********************
                 |                 v                  |
                 |          ***********************   |    **********************
                 +--------> * PDB [3D structures] *   +--> * Aarhus/Ghent  [2D] *
                            ***********************        **********************


















    <PAGE>
      
