---
title: TrEMBL release 5.0
categories: tr-major
---

                                  TREMBL Release Notes
                                  Release 5, January 1998


        EMBL Outstation
        European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
        Wellcome Trust Genome Campus
        Hinxton
        Cambridge CB10 1SD
        United Kingdom

        Telephone: (+44 1223) 494 400
        Fax: (+44 1223) 494 468
        Electronic mail address: DATALIB@EBI.AC.UK
        WWW server: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/

        Amos Bairoch
        Medical Biochemistry Department
        Centre Medical Universitaire
        1211 Geneva 4
        Switzerland

        Telephone: (+41 22) 784 40 82
        Fax: (+41 22) 702 55 02
        Electronic mail address: BAIROCH@CMU.UNIGE.CH
        WWW server: http://www.expasy.ch/

        Acknowledgements

        TREMBL has been prepared by:

        o  Rolf Apweiler, Sergio Contrino, Wolfgang Fleischmann, Henning
           Hermjakob, Vivien Junker, Stephanie Kappus, Fiona Lang, Michele
           Magrane, Maria Jesus Martin, Steffen Moeller, Nicoletta Mitaritonna
           and Claire O'Donovan at the EMBL Outstation - European Bioinformatics
           Institute (EBI) in Hinxton, UK;
        o  Amos Bairoch and Alain Gateau at the Medical Biochemistry Department
           of the University of Geneva, Switzerland.

        Notes

        This manual and the database it accompanies may be copied and
        redistributed freely, without advance permission, provided
        that this statement is reproduced with each copy.

        Citation

        If you  want to  cite  TREMBL  in  a  publication  please  use  the
        following reference:

                  Bairoch A., and Apweiler R.
                  The SWISS-PROT protein sequence data bank and its
                  supplement TREMBL in 1998.
                  Nucleic Acids Res. 26:38-42(1998).

                             1. Introduction


    TREMBL is a computer-annotated protein sequence database supplementing the
    SWISS-PROT Protein Sequence Data Bank. TREMBL contains the translations of
    all coding sequences (CDS) present in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database
    not yet integrated in SWISS-PROT. TREMBL can be considered as a preliminary
    section of SWISS-PROT. For all TREMBL entries which should finally be
    upgraded to the standard SWISS-PROT quality, SWISS-PROT accession numbers
    have been assigned.

                            2. Why a supplement to SWISS-PROT?

    The ongoing gene sequencing and mapping projects have dramatically
    increased the number of protein sequences to be incorporated into SWISS-PROT.
    We do not want to dilute the quality standards of SWISS-PROT by incorporating
    sequences without proper sequence analysis and annotation, but we do want to
    make the sequences available as fast as possible. TREMBL achieves this second
    goal, and is a major step in the process of speeding up subsequent
    upgrading of annotation to the standard SWISS-PROT quality.
    To address the problem of redundancy, the translations of all coding
    sequences (CDS) in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database already included
    in SWISS-PROT have been removed from TREMBL.

    We name this supplement TREMBL (TRanslation from EMBL), since the tools
    used to create the translations of the CDS are based on the program
    'trembl' written by Thure Etzold at the EMBL.

                                 3. The Release

    This TREMBL release is created from the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database
    release 53 and contains 166'361 sequence entries, comprising 45'671'684 amino
    acids. To minimize redundancy, the translations of all coding sequences (CDS)
    in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database already included in SWISS-PROT
    Release 35 have been removed from TREMBL release 5.

    TREMBL is split in two main sections; SP-TREMBL and REM-TREMBL:

    SP-TREMBL (SWISS-PROT TREMBL) contains the entries (140'555) which should be
    eventually incorporated into SWISS-PROT. SWISS-PROT accession numbers have been
    assigned for all SP-TREMBL entries.

    SP-TREMBL is organized in subsections:

    fun.dat (Fungi):                4694 entries
    hum.dat (Human):                6101 entries
    inv.dat (Invertebrates):       18423 entries
    mam.dat (Other Mammals):        2444 entries
    mhc.dat (MHC proteins):         3336 entries
    org.dat (Organelles):          10561 entries
    phg.dat (Bacteriophages):       1111 entries
    pln.dat (Plants):               9871 entries
    pro.dat (Prokaryotes):         34832 entries
    rod.dat (Rodents):              5976 entries
    unc.dat (Unclassified):          109 entries
    vrl.dat (Viruses):             39943 entries
    vrt.dat (Other Vertebrates):    3154 entries

    30'007 new entries have been integrated in SP-TREMBL. 1'860 sequences of
    SP-TREMBL entries have been updated and in 26'093 cases the annotation
    has been updated.

    In the document deleteac.txt you will find a list of all accession numbers
    which appeared in the TREMBL data bank, but have been deleted from the
    database.

    REM-TREMBL (REMaining TREMBL) contains the entries (25'806) that we do
    not want to include in SWISS-PROT.REM-TREMBL entries have no accession
    numbers. This section is organized in five subsections:

       1) Immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors (Immuno.dat)
          Most REM-TREMBL entries will be immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors.
          We stopped entering  immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors into SWISS-
          PROT, because we only   want to  keep  the  germ  line  gene  derived
          translations of  these proteins  in  SWISS-PROT  and  not  all  known
          somatic recombinated  variations of  these proteins. We would like to
          create  a  specialized  database  dealing  with these sequences as  a
          further  supplement to  SWISS-PROT and  keep  only  a  representative
          cross-section of these proteins in SWISS-PROT.

       2) Synthetic sequences (Synth.dat)
          Another category of data which will not be included in SWISS-PROT are
          synthetic sequences.  Again, we do not want to leave these entries in
          TREMBL.  Ideally   one  should   build  a  specialized  database  for
          artificial sequences as a further supplement to SWISS-PROT.

       3) Patent application sequences (Patent.dat)
          A third  subsection consists of coding sequences captured from patent
          applications. A thorough  survey of  these  entries  have shown  that
          apart from a rather small minority (which in  most cases have already
          been  integrated in  SWISS-PROT),  most of these  sequences  contains
          either  erroneous data or concern  artificially  generated  sequences
          outside the scope of SWISS-PROT.

       4) Small fragments (Smalls.dat)
          Another  subsection consists  of fragments with less than eight amino
          acids.

       5) CDS not coding for real proteins (Pseudo.dat)
          The last subsection consists of CDS translations where we have strong
          evidence to believe that these CDS are not coding for real proteins.


                    4. Format Differences Between SWISS-PROT and TREMBL

    The format and conventions used by TREMBL follow as closely as possible
    that of SWISS-PROT. Hence, it is not necessary to produce an additional
    user manual and extensive release notes for TREMBL. The information given
    in the SWISS-PROT release notes and user manual are in general valid for
    TREMBL. The differences are mentioned below.

    The general structure of an entry is identical in SWISS-PROT and TREMBL.
    The data class used in TREMBL (in the ID line) is always 'PRELIMINARY',
    whereas in SWISS-PROT it is always 'STANDARD'.

    Differences in line types present in SWISS-PROT and TREMBL:

    The ID line (IDentification):

    The entry name used in SP-TREMBL is the same as the Accession Number of the
    entry. The entry name used in REM-TREMBL is the PID tagged to the
    corresponding CDS in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database. 'PID' stands for
    the "Protein IDentification" number. It is a number that you will find in
    EMBL nucleotide sequence entries in a qualifier called "/db_xref" which is
    tagged to every CDS in the nucleotide database. Example:

       FT   CDS            54..1382
       FT                  /note="ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/
       FT                  oxygenase activase precursor"
       FT                  /db_xref="PID:g1006835"

    The DT line (DaTe)

    The format of the DT lines that serve to indicate when an entry was
    created and updated are identical to that defined in SWISS-PROT; but the
    DT lines in TREMBL are referring to the TREMBL release. The difference is
    shown in the example below.

        DT lines in a SWISS-PROT entry:

        DT   01-JAN-1988 (REL. 06, CREATED)
        DT   01-JUL-1989 (REL. 11, LAST SEQUENCE UPDATE)
        DT   01-AUG-1992 (REL. 23, LAST ANNOTATION UPDATE)

        DT lines in a TREMBL entry:

        DT   01-NOV-1996 (TREMBLREL. 01, CREATED)
        DT   01-NOV-1996 (TREMBLREL. 01, LAST SEQUENCE UPDATE)
        DT   01-FEB-1997 (TREMBLREL. 02, LAST ANNOTATION UPDATE)

                    5. Weekly updates of TREMBL and non-redundant data sets

    Weekly cumulative updates of TREMBL are available by anonymous FTP and
    from the EBI SRS server.
    We also produce every week a complete non-redundant protein sequence
    collection by providing three compressed files (these are in the directory
    /pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb on the EBI FTP server and in databases/sp_tr_nrdb
    on the ExPASy server): sprot.dat.Z, trembl.dat.Z and trembl_new.dat.Z.
    This set of non-redundant files is especially important for two types of
    users:
    (i) Managers of similarity search services. They can now provide what is
    currently the most comprehensive and non-redundant data set of protein
    sequences.
    (ii) Anybody wanting to update their full copy of SWISS-PROT + TREMBL to
    their own schedule without having to wait for full releases of SWISS-PROT
    or of TREMBL.

                    6. Access/Data Distribution

    FTP server:     ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl
    SRS server:     http://srs.ebi.ac.uk:5000/

    TREMBL is also available on the SWISS-PROT CD-ROM.
    SWISS-PROT + TREMBL is searchable on the FASTA3, BLAST2 and Bic_sw servers
    of the EBI.
      
