---
title: Swiss-Prot release 36.0
categories: sp-major
---

                       SWISS-PROT RELEASE 36.0 RELEASE NOTES

     !! Important: do not forget to read section 11 of these release notes. It
     contains an important announcement relevant to SWISS-PROT and PROSITE !!


                       1.  INTRODUCTION


     Release 36.0 of  SWISS-PROT contains 74'019  sequence entries,  comprising
     26'840'295 amino acids abstracted from 59'911 references.  This represents
     an increase  of  7% over  release  35. The  growth  of the  data  bank  is
     summarized below.

     Release      Date           Number of       Number of amino
                                   entries                 acids
        2.0       09/86               3939               900 163
        3.0       11/86               4160               969 641
        4.0       04/87               4387             1 036 010
        5.0       09/87               5205             1 327 683
        6.0       01/88               6102             1 653 982
        7.0       04/88               6821             1 885 771
        8.0       08/88               7724             2 224 465
        9.0       11/88               8702             2 498 140
       10.0       03/89              10008             2 952 613
       11.0       07/89              10856             3 265 966
       12.0       10/89              12305             3 797 482
       13.0       01/90              13837             4 347 336
       14.0       04/90              15409             4 914 264
       15.0       08/90              16941             5 486 399
       16.0       11/90              18364             5 986 949
       17.0       02/91              20024             6 524 504
       18.0       05/91              20772             6 792 034
       19.0       08/91              21795             7 173 785
       20.0       11/91              22654             7 500 130
       21.0       03/92              23742             7 866 596
       22.0       05/92              25044             8 375 696
       23.0       08/92              26706             9 011 391
       24.0       12/92              28154             9 545 427
       25.0       04/93              29955            10 214 020
       26.0       07/93              31808            10 875 091
       27.0       10/93              33329            11 484 420
       28.0       02/94              36000            12 496 420
       29.0       06/94              38303            13 464 008
       30.0       10/94              40292            14 147 368
       31.0       02/95              43470            15 335 248
       32.0       11/95              49340            17 385 503
       33.0       02/96              52205            18 531 384
       34.0       10/96              59021            21 210 389
       35.0       11/97              69113            25 083 768
       36.0       07/98              74019            26 840 295



         2.  DESCRIPTION OF THE CHANGES MADE TO SWISS-PROT SINCE RELEASE 35

     2.1  Sequences and annotations

     4'976 sequences have been added since release 35, the sequence data of 712
     existing entries has  been updated  and the annotations  of 9'954  entries
     have been revised.


     2.2  What's happening with the model organisms

     We have  selected a  number of  organisms that  are the  target of  genome
     sequencing and/or mapping projects and for which we intend to:

     . Be as  complete as possible.  All sequences  available at  a given  time
       should  be  immediately  included  in  SWISS-PROT.  This  also  includes
       sequence corrections and updates;
     . Provide a higher level of annotation;
     . Provide cross-references to specialized database(s) that  contain, among
       other data, some genetic information about the genes that code for these
       proteins;
     . Provide specific indices or documents.
       What was  done since  the  last release  or in  preparation  for the  next release concerning model organisms:

     - We have  continued  our  effort  in  catching up  with  the  backlog  of
       sequences from other model organisms.  In particular we added about  350
       entries from human and  from E.coli, 300 from  mouse, 250 from  S.pombe,
       200 from M.jannaschii, 150 from C.elegans, 100 from B.subtilis, H.pylori
       and from M.tuberculosis.

     - We  plan to  finish  as  quickly  as  possible  the  annotation  of  the
       Escherichia coli and Haemophilus  influenzae sequence entries which  are
       not yet part of SWISS-PROT.

     Here is the current status of the model organisms in SWISS-PROT:

     Organism        Database            Index file       Number of
                     cross-referenced                     sequences
     --------------  ----------------    --------------   ---------
     A.thaliana      None yet            In preparation         719
     B.subtilis      SubtiList           SUBTILIS.TXT          1970
     C.albicans      None yet            CALBICAN.TXT           192
     C.elegans       Wormpep             CELEGANS.TXT          1887
     D.discoideum    DictyDB             DICTY.TXT              280
     D.melanogaster  FlyBase             FLY.TXT               1042
     E.coli          EcoGene             ECOLI.TXT             4416
     H.influenzae    HiDB (TIGR)         HAEINFLU.TXT          1693
     H.sapiens       MIM                 MIMTOSP.TXT           4980
     H.pylori        HpDB (TIGR)         HPYLORI.TXT            334
     M.genitalium    MgDB (TIGR)         MGENITAL.TXT           470
     M.musculus      MGD                 MGDTOSP.TXT           3253
     M.jannaschii    MjDB (TIGR)         MJANNASC.TXT          1283
     M.tuberculosis  None yet            None yet               873
     S.cerevisiae    SGD                 YEAST.TXT             4787
     S.typhimurium   StyGene             SALTY.TXT              706
     S.pombe         None yet            POMBE.TXT             1315
     S.solfataricus  None yet            None yet                72

     Collectively the entries from the above model organisms represent 40.9% of
     all SWISS-PROT entries.


     2.3  Changes affecting the accession numbers

     With the creation  of the TrEMBL  database (see section  6) and the  rapid
     increase in the amount of  sequence data, we are  faced with a problem  of
     availability of accession numbers.  Currently we use a  system based on  a
     one-letter prefix followed by 5  digits. This system was also used  by the
     nucleotide sequence databases which had originally reserved for SWISS-PROT
     the prefix letters 'P' and 'Q'. The nucleotide databases having run out of
     space (due mainly to EST's), have been forced to start using  a new format
     based on a two-letter prefix followed by 6 digits.

     We have used up all possible numbers with 'P' and 'Q' and  the only letter
     prefix which was not used by the nucleotide database is 'O'. As we believe
     that changing the format of the accession numbers to that used  now by the
     nucleotide database would create havoc  on the numerous software  packages
     using SWISS-PROT, we have  decided to keep a  system of accession  numbers
     based on a six-character code, but with the following changes:

     1)   We have  started  using 'O'.  This  extra letter  should  allow the
     continuation of  the present  format (1  prefix letter  + 5  digits) for
     approximately one year.
     2)   When we will have finished using up 'O', we will introduce a system
     based on the following format:

          1        2       3          4            5            6
         [O,P,Q]  [0-9]  [A-Z, 0-9]  [A-Z, 0-9]   [A-Z, 0-9]   [0-9]

     What the above means is that  we will keep a six-character code,  but that
     in positions  3, 4  and 5  of this  code any  combination  of letters  and
     numbers can be present. This format allows a total of 14 million accession
     numbers (up from 300'000 with the current system).

     We only  allow  numbers  in positions  2  and  6 so  that  the  SWISS-PROT
     accession numbers can  not be  mistaken with gene  names, acronyms,  other
     type of accession numbers or any type of words!

     Examples: P0A3S2, Q2ASD4, O13YX2, P9B123


     2.4  Changes concerning the reference location line (RL)

     The (IN) prefix  used for books  is now  also used for  references to  the
     electronic Plant Gene Register (See http://www.tarweed.com/pgr/). Example:

     RL   (IN) PLANT GENE REGISTER PGR98-023.


     2.5  Cleaning up of the SIMILARITY comment line (CC) topic

     We started a major overhaul  of the "SIMILARITY" topic. We would  like the
     majority of the information stored in this topic to be  usable by computer
     programs (while being human-readable). We are therefore  standardizing the
     format of this topic  using two different subformats.  One to describe  to
     which family a protein belongs to:

     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE {Name1} FAMILY [OF {Name2}].
     CC         [{Name3} SUBFAMILY.]

     Examples:

     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE 14-3-3 FAMILY.
     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE 6-PHOSPHOGLUCONATE DEHYDROGENASE
     CC         FAMILY.
     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE AAA FAMILY OF ATPASES.
     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE IRON/ASCORBATE-DEPENDENT FAMILY OF
     CC         OXIDOREDUCTASES.
     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE ANTP FAMILY OF HOMEOBOX PROTEINS.
     CC         "DEFORMED" SUBFAMILY.
     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE KINESIN-LIKE PROTEIN FAMILY. KINESIN
     CC         SUBFAMILY.

     And one to describe which domains are found in a given protein:

     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: CONTAINS n {Name} [DOMAIN|REPEAT][S].

     Examples:

     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: CONTAINS 1 FHA DOMAIN.
     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: CONTAINS 45 EGF-LIKE DOMAINS.
     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: CONTAINS 2 SH3 DOMAINS.
     CC   - !-  SIMILARITY: CONTAINS 2 SUSHI (SCR) REPEATS.

     We already have updated many entries in this release and  plan to continue
     to do so for the next release.


     2.6  Changes concerning cross-references (DR line)

     We have added cross-references from  SWISS-PROT to the Mendel database,  a
     plant gene  nomenclature  database  from the  Commission  for  Plant  Gene
     Nomenclature (CPGN). These cross-references are present in the DR lines:

     Data bank identifier:  MENDEL
     Primary identifier  :  The Mendel accession number for a gene  in a  given
                            species.
     Secondary identifier:  Composed of the acronym of  the species  (generally
                            the same five-letter  code as that defined and used
                            by SWISS-PROT in the entry name), the gene name and
                            a number.
     Example:               DR   MENDEL; 294; Amahy;psbA;1.



                      3. PLANNED CHANGES

     3.1  Extension of the accession number system

     As already explained in  detail under 2.3, we  will extend the accession
     number system when  we will  have used  up the  'O' series  of accession
     numbers. This can be anticipated for October 1998.


     3.2  Switch to the NCBI taxonomy

     To standardize the taxonomies used by different databases we will change
     with release 37 our taxonomy. We will switch to the NCBI taxonomy, which
     is  already  used  as  the  common  taxonomy  by  the  DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank
     nucleotide sequence databases.


     3.3  Introduction of RT lines

     With release 37  we will introduce  a new  line type,  the RT (Reference
     Title) line. This  optional line will  be placed  between the  RA and RL
     line. The  RT line  gives the  title  of the  paper (or  other  work) as
     exactly as possible given the limitations of the computer character set.
     The form which will  be used is that  which would be used  in a citation
     rather than displayed at  the top of the  published paper. For instance,
     where journals capitalize major  title words this is  not preserved. The
     title is enclosed  in double quotes,  and may be  continued over several
     lines as necessary.  The title lines  are terminated by  a semicolon. An
     example of the use of RT lines is shown below:

     RT   "Sequence analysis of the genome of the unicellular cyanobacterium
     RT   Synechocystis sp. strain PCC6803. I. Sequence features in the 1 Mb
     RT   region from map positions 64% to 92% of the genome.";



                      4. STATUS OF THE DOCUMENTATION FILES

     SWISS-PROT is distributed with a large number of documentation files. Some
     of these  files have  been available  for a  long time  (the user  manual,
     release notes,  the  various  indices for  authors,  citations,  keywords,
     etc.), but many have been created recently and we are  continuously adding
     new files. Since release 35,  we have added three new document  files. The
     following table lists all the documents that are currently available.

     USERMAN.TXT    User manual
     RELNOTES.TXT   Release notes
     OLDRLNOT.TXT   Release notes for previous release [1,2]
     SHORTDES.TXT   Short description of entries in SWISS-PROT
     JOURLIST.TXT   List of abbreviations for journals cited [3]
     KEYWLIST.TXT   List of keywords in use
     SPECLIST.TXT   List of organism identification codes
     TISSLIST.TXT   List of tissues [4]
     EXPERTS.TXT    List of on-line experts for PROSITE and SWISS-PROT
     SUBMIT.TXT     Submission of sequence data to SWISS-PROT

     ACINDEX.TXT    Accession number index
     AUTINDEX.TXT   Author index
     CITINDEX.TXT   Citation index
     KEYINDEX.TXT   Keyword index
     SPEINDEX.TXT   Species index
     DELETEAC.TXT   Deleted accession number index

     7TMRLIST.TXT   List of 7-transmembrane G-linked receptors entries
     AATRNASY.TXT   List of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
     ALLERGEN.TXT   Nomenclature and index of allergen sequences
     BLOODGRP.TXT   List of blood group antigen proteins
     CALBICAN.TXT   Index   of  Candida  albicans  entries   and  their
                    corresponding gene designations
     CDLIST.TXT     CD  nomenclature  for  surface  proteins  of  human
                    leucocytes
     CELEGANS.TXT   Index  of Caenorhabditis elegans entries  and their
                    corresponding gene Wormpep cross-references
     DICTY.TXT      Index   of  Dictyostelium  discoideum  entries  and
                    their  corresponding gene designations  and DictyDb
                    cross-references
     EC2DTOSP.TXT   Index  of  Escherichia coli  Gene-protein  database
                    entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     ECOLI.TXT      Index  of Escherichia coli K12  chromosomal entries
                    and their corresponding EcoGene cross-references
     EMBLTOSP.TXT   Index  of   EMBL  Database  entries  referenced  in
                    SWISS-PROT
     EXTRADOM.TXT   Nomenclature of extracellular domains
     FLY.TXT        Index  of  Drosophila  entries and  FlyBase  cross-
                    references
     GLYCOSID.TXT   Classification  of glycosyl hydrolase  families and
                    index of glycosyl hydrolase entries
     HAEINFLU.TXT   Index  of  Haemophilus  influenzae  RD  chromosomal
                    entries
     HOXLIST.TXT    Vertebrate  homeotic Hox proteins: nomenclature and
                    index
     HPYLORI.TXT    Index   of   Helicobacter   pylori   strain   26695
                    chromosomal entries
     HUMCHR17.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 17 [1]
     HUMCHR18.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 18
     HUMCHR19.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 19
     HUMCHR20.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 20
     HUMCHR21.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 21
     HUMCHR22.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 22
     HUMCHRX.TXT    Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome X
     HUMCHRY.TXT    Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome Y
     HUMPVAR.TXT    Index of human proteins with sequence variants [1]
     INITFACT.TXT   List and index of translation initiation factors
     MIMTOSP.TXT    Index of MIM entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     METALLO.TXT    Classification  of  metallothioneins and  index  of
                    entries in SWISS-PROT
     MGDTOSP.TXT    Index of MGD entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     MGENITAL.TXT   Index  of Mycoplasma genitalium chromosomal entries
     MJANNASC.TXT   Index of Methanococcus jannaschii entries
     NGR234.TXT     Table  of   putative  genes  in  Rhizobium  plasmid
                    pNGR234a
     NOMLIST.TXT    List   of  nomenclature   related  references   for
                    proteins
     PCC6803.TXT    Index of Synechocystis strain PCC 6803 entries
     PDBTOSP.TXT    Index  of X-ray  crystallography Protein Data  Bank
                    (PDB) entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     PEPTIDAS.TXT   Classification  of peptidase families and  index of
                    peptidase entries
     PLASTID.TXT    List of chloroplast and cyanelle encoded proteins
     POMBE.TXT      Index   of  Schizosaccharomyces  pombe  entries  in
                    SWISS-PROT    and    their    corresponding    gene
                    designations
     RESTRIC.TXT    List of restriction enzyme and methylase entries
     RIBOSOMP.TXT   Index of  ribosomal proteins classified by families
                    on the basis of sequence similarities
     SALTY.TXT      Index  of  Salmonella typhimurium  LT2  chromosomal
                    entries  and  their  corresponding  StyGene  cross-
                    references
     SUBTILIS.TXT   Index of  Bacillus subtilis 168 chromosomal entries
                    and their corresponding SubtiList cross-references
     UPFLIST.TXT    UPF  (Uncharacterized  Protein Families)  list  and
                    index of members
     YEAST.TXT      Index   of  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  entries  and
                    their corresponding gene designations
     YEAST1.TXT     Yeast Chromosome I entries
     YEAST2.TXT     Yeast Chromosome II entries
     YEAST3.TXT     Yeast Chromosome III entries
     YEAST5.TXT     Yeast Chromosome V entries
     YEAST6.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VI entries
     YEAST7.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VII entries
     YEAST8.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VIII entries
     YEAST9.TXT     Yeast Chromosome IX entries
     YEAST10.TXT    Yeast Chromosome X entries
     YEAST11.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XI entries
     YEAST13.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XIII entries
     YEAST14.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XIV entries

     Notes:

     1    New in release 36.
     2    We  apologize  for  having  not   included,  with  release  35,   the
          corresponding release notes. We are therefore including it  with this
          release. As we believe that it may be useful to always distribute the
          release notes of  the previous release,  we will start  to do so  and
          such a file will be now known as "OLDRLNOT.TXT".
     3    Has been extensively updated and contains Web links to more  than 640
          journals.
     4    Has been  extensively  updated and  now  includes synonyms  for  many
          tissues.

     We have  continued  to  include  in some  SWISS-PROT  document  files  the
     references of Web sites relevant to the subject under consideration. There
     are now 24 documents that include such links.



                      5. THE EXPASY WORLD-WIDE WEB SERVER

     5.1  Background information

     The most  efficient and  user-friendly  way to  browse  interactively in
     SWISS-PROT, PROSITE, ENZYME, SWISS-2DPAGE and other databases. is to use
     the World-Wide  Web (WWW)  molecular biology  server ExPASy.  The ExPASy
     server was  made  available  to the  public in  September  1993,  it  is
     reachable at the following address:

                                  http://www.expasy.ch/

     The ExPASy WWW server  allows access, using  the user-friendly hypertext
     model, to the  SWISS-PROT, PROSITE,  ENZYME, SWISS-2DPAGE, SWISS-3DIMAGE
     and CD40Lbase  databases and,  through any  SWISS-PROT  protein sequence
     entry, to  other databases  such  as EMBL,  Eco2DBASE,  EcoCyc, FlyBase,
     GCRDb, MaizeDB, SubtiList/NRSub,  OMIM, PDB, HSSP,  ProDom, REBASE, SGD,
     YEPD and  Medline. ExPAsy  also offers  many tools  for the  analysis of
     protein sequences and 2D gels.


     5.2  SWISS-SHOP

     We provide, on  ExPASy, a  service called SWISS-SHOP.  SWISS-Shop allows
     any users of SWISS-PROT  to indicate what proteins  he/she is interested
     in. This can be done using various criteria that can be combined:

     -    By entering  one  or  more words  that  should  be  present  in the
          description line;
     -    By entering one or more species name(s) or taxonomic division(s);
     -    By entering one or more keywords;
     -    By entering one or more author names;
     -    By entering  the  accession number  (or  entry name)  of  a PROSITE
          pattern or a user-defined sequence pattern;
     -    By entering the  accession number  (or entry  name) of  an existing
          SWISS-PROT entry or by entering a "private" sequence.

     Every week, the  new sequences  entered in SWISS-PROT  are automatically
     compared with all the criteria that have been defined by the users. If a
     sequence corresponds to the  selection criteria defined by  a user, that
     sequence is sent by electronic mail.


     5.3  What is new on ExPASy

     ExPASy is constantly modified  and improved. If you  wish to be informed
     on the changes made to the server you can either:

     -    Read  the  document  "History  of  changes,  improvements  and  new
          features" which is available at the address:

                  http://www.expasy.ch/www/history.html

     -    Subscribe to SWISS-Flash, a service that reports news of databases,
          software and services developments. By subscribing to this service,
          you will  automatically  get  SWISS-Flash  bulletins  by electronic
          mail. To subscribe use the address:

                  http://www.expasy.ch/www/swiss-flash.html



                      6. TREMBL - A SUPPLEMENT TO SWISS-PROT

     The ongoing  genome  sequencing  and mapping  projects  have  dramatically
     increased the number of protein  sequences to be incorporated into  SWISS-
     PROT. Since we do not  want to dilute the quality standards  of SWISS-PROT
     by incorporating  sequences  into  the database  without  proper  sequence
     analysis and  annotation, we  cannot  speed up  the incorporation  of  new
     incoming data  indefinitely. But as  we also  want to  make the  sequences
     available as  fast  as possible,  we  have introduced  with  SWISS-PROT  a
     computer annotated  supplement. This  supplement  consists of  entries  in
     SWISS-PROT-like  format  derived  from  the  translation  of   all  coding
     sequences (CDS)  in the EMBL  nucleotide sequence  database, except  those
     already included in SWISS-PROT.
       We  name this  supplement  TrEMBL  (Translation  from  EMBL).  It  can  be
     considered as a preliminary section of SWISS-PROT. This SWISS-PROT release
     is supplemented by TrEMBL release 6. TrEMBL is split in two main sections;
     SP-TrEMBL and REM-TrEMBL:
       - SP-TrEMBL (SWISS-PROT TrEMBL) contains the entries (150'329 in release
       6) which should  be incorporated into SWISS-PROT. SWISS-PROT accession
       numbers have been assigned for all SP-TrEMBL entries.

     - REM-TrEMBL (REMaining TrEMBL) contains  the entries (27'428 in release
       6) that  we do not want to include  in  SWISS-PROT  for  a  variety of
       reasons (synthetic  sequences,  pseudogenes, translations of uncorrect
       open reading frames,  fragments  with  less  than eight  amino  acids,
       patent-derived sequences, immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors, etc.)

     TrEMBL is  available by FTP  from the  EBI server  (ftp.ebi.ac.uk) in  the
     directory '/pub/databases/trembl'. It can be queried on WWW by the EBI SRS
     server (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/). It is also available on the SWISS-PROT CD-
     ROM and is searchable on the FASTA, BIC and BLAST servers of the EBI.


                      7. WEEKLY UPDATES OF SWISS-PROT

     Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT are available by anonymous FTP. Three files
     are updated at each update:

     new_seq.dat    Contains all the new entries since the last full release;
     upd_seq.dat    Contains the entries for which the sequence data has been
                    updated since the last release;
     upd_ann.dat    Contains  the entries  for which  one or  more annotation
                    fields have been updated since the last release.

     Currently these  files  are  available on  the  following  anonymous FTP
     servers:

     Organization   Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)
     Address        ftp.expasy.ch
     Directory      /databases/swiss-prot/updates

     Organization   European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
     Address        ftp.ebi.ac.uk
     Directory      /pub/databases/swissprot/new

     !! Important notes !!

     - Although  we try to  follow a  regular schedule,  we do  not promise  to
       update these files every  week. In some cases two weeks will  elapse in-
       between two updates.
     - Due to  the current mechanism used to build  a release the entries  that
       are provided in these updates are not guaranteed to be error free.
     - Instead  of using  the above  files, you  can, every  week, download  an
       updated copy of the  SWISS-PROT database. This file is available  in the
       directory containing the non-redundant database (see next section).



                      8. NON-REDUNDANT DATABASE

     A few  months ago, we  started to  distribute on  the ExPASy  and EBI  FTP
     servers, files that  make up  a non-redundant (see  further) and  complete
     protein sequence database consisting of three components:

     1) SWISS-PROT
     2) TrEMBL
     3) New  entries to be  later integrated  into TrEMBL  (hereafter known  as
        TrEMBL_New)

     Every week  three files  are completely  rebuilt. These  files are  named:
     sprot.dat.Z, trembl.dat.Z and trembl_new.dat.Z. As indicated by their ".Z"
     extension these are Unix "compress" format files which, when decompressed,
     will produce ASCII files in SWISS-PROT format.

     Three others  files  are  also available  (sprot.fas.Z,  trembl.fas.Z  and
     trembl_new.fas.Z)  Which are  compressed  "fasta"  format  sequence  files
     useful for building the databases used by FASTA, BLAST and  other sequence
     similarity search  programs.  Please do  not  use these  files  for  other
     purpose as you loose all annotations by using this very primitive format.

     The files  for the  non-redundant  database are  stored in  the  directory
     "/databases/sp_tr_nrdb" on the  ExPASy FTP server  (ftp.expasy.ch) and  in the  directory   "/pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb"  on   the   EBI  FTP   server
     (ftp.ebi.ac.uk).

     Additional notes

     - The SWISS-PROT  file continuously grows as  new annotated sequences  are
       added.
     - The TrEMBL  file decreases in size  as sequences are  moved out of  that
       section after  being annotated and moved  into SWISS-PROT. Four times  a
       year a new release  of TrEMBL is built at EBI, at this point  the TrEMBL
       file  increases in size  as it then  includes all of  the new data  (see
       next section) that has accumulated since the last release.
     - The TrEMBL_New file starts as a very small file and grows  in size until
       a new release of TrEMBL is available.

     - SWISS-PROT  and  TrEMBL share  the  same system  of  accession  numbers.
       Therefore  you will  not find  any primary  accession number  duplicated
       between the two  sections. A TrEMBL entry (and its  associated accession
       number(s)) can either move to SWISS-PROT as new entry or  be merged with
       an  existing  SWISS-PROT  entry.  In  the  later   case,  the  accession
       number(s)  of that  TrEMBL entry  are added  to that  of the  SWISS-PROT
       entry.
     - TrEMBL_New  does  not  have  real  accession  numbers.  However  it  was
       necessary  to  have an  "AC"  line so  as  to be  able  to use  it  with
       different  software   products.  This  AC  line  contains  a   temporary
       identifier which consists of the pID (protein identifier)  of the coding
       sequence in the parent nucleotide sequence.

     - While  these  three files  allow  you to  build  what we  call  a  "non-
       redundant"  database, it must  be noted  that this is  not completely  a
       true statement.  Without going into a long  explanation we can say  that
       this is currently the best attempt in providing a  complete selection of
       protein  sequence entries yet  trying to  eliminate redundancies.  While
       SWISS-PROT is  completely (well 99.994% !) non-redundant, TrEMBL  is far
       from  being non-redundant and  the addition  of SWISS-PROT  + TrEMBL  is
       even less.
       - To  describe to your  users the  version of  the non-redundant  database
       that you are providing to them, you should use a statement of the form:

          SWISS-PROT release 36 and updates until {current_date};
          TrEMBL  release  6  minus  data  integrated  into  SWISS-PROT  as  of
          {current_date};
          New preliminary TrEMBL entries created since release 6 of TrEMBL


                      9.  ENZYME and PROSITE

     9.1  The ENZYME data bank

     Release 23.0 of  the ENZYME data  bank is distributed  with release 36  of
     SWISS-PROT. ENZYME  release 23.0  contains  information relative  to  3704
     enzymes. It also differs from  the previous release (22 of November  1997)
     in that the "DE" (Description), "AN" (Alternative Names),  "CF" (Cofactor)
     and "CC"  (Comments) lines  are now  in mixed-case  characters instead  of
     being all in UPPER case.

     Example, what was before:

     ID   1.4.4.2
     DE   GLYCINE DEHYDROGENASE (DECARBOXYLATING).
     AN   GLYCINE DECARBOXYLASE.
     AN   GLYCINE CLEAVAGE SYSTEM P-PROTEIN.
     CA   GLYCINE + LIPOYLPROTEIN = S-AMINOMETHYLDIHYDROLIPOYLPROTEIN + CO(2).
     CF   PYRIDOXAL-PHOSPHATE.
     CC   -!- LIPOAMIDE CAN ALSO ACT AS ACCEPTOR.
     CC   -!- A COMPONENT, WITH EC 2.1.2.10, OF THE GLYCINE CLEAVAGE SYSTEM,
     CC       PREVIOUSLY KNOWN AS GLYCINE SYNTHASE.
     DI   NONKETOTIC HYPERGLYCINEMIA TYPE II; MIM:238310.
     DR   P54376, GCS1_BACSU;  P54377, GCS2_BACSU;  P49361, GCSA_FLAPR;
     DR   P49362, GCSB_FLAPR;  P15505, GCSP_CHICK;  P33195, GCSP_ECOLI;
     DR   O49850, GCSP_FLAAN;  O49852, GCSP_FLATR;  P23378, GCSP_HUMAN;
     DR   Q50601, GCSP_MYCTU;  P26969, GCSP_PEA  ;  Q09785, GCSP_SCHPO;
     DR   O49954, GCSP_SOLTU;  P49095, GCSP_YEAST;
     //

     is now:

     ID   1.4.4.2
     DE   Glycine dehydrogenase (decarboxylating).
     AN   Glycine decarboxylase.
     AN   Glycine cleavage system P-protein.
     CA   GLYCINE + LIPOYLPROTEIN = S-AMINOMETHYLDIHYDROLIPOYLPROTEIN + CO(2).
     CF   Pyridoxal-phosphate.
     CC   -!- Lipoamide can also act as acceptor.
     CC   -!- A component, with EC 2.1.2.10, of the glycine cleavage system,
     CC       previously known as glycine synthase.
     DI   NONKETOTIC HYPERGLYCINEMIA TYPE II; MIM:238310.
     DR   P54376, GCS1_BACSU;  P54377, GCS2_BACSU;  P49361, GCSA_FLAPR;
     DR   P49362, GCSB_FLAPR;  P15505, GCSP_CHICK;  P33195, GCSP_ECOLI;
     DR   O49850, GCSP_FLAAN;  O49852, GCSP_FLATR;  P23378, GCSP_HUMAN;
     DR   Q50601, GCSP_MYCTU;  P26969, GCSP_PEA  ;  Q09785, GCSP_SCHPO;
     DR   O49954, GCSP_SOLTU;  P49095, GCSP_YEAST;
     //

     We plan to convert the  "CA" (Catalytic Activity) lines to mixed-case  for
     the next release.


     9.2  The PROSITE data bank

     Release 15.0 of the  PROSITE data bank is  distributed with release 36  of
     SWISS-PROT. This release  of PROSITE contains  1014 documentation  entries
     that describe 1'352 different patterns, rules and profiles/matrices.



                      10. WE NEED YOUR HELP !

     We welcome feedback from our users.  We would especially appreciate that
     you notify us  if you  find that  sequences belonging  to your  field of
     expertise are  missing from  the data  bank. We  also  would like  to be
     notified about annotations to be updated,  if, for example, the function
     of a protein has been clarified or if new post-translational information
     has become  available. To  facilitate such  feedback's  we offer  on the
     ExPASY WWW server  a form that  allows the submission  of updates and/or
     corrections to SWISS-PROT:

                   http://www.expasy.ch/sprot/sp_update_form.html

     It is also  possible, from  any entries in  SWISS-PROT displayed  by the
     ExPASy server, to submit updates and/or  corrections for that particular
     entry. Finally, you  can also send  your comments by  electronic mail to
     the address:

                                swiss-prot@expasy.ch



                      11. IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENT

     It became obvious in the  last years that the tremendous increase  in data
     flow has created a requirement for resources which cannot be  addressed in
     full by  public funding.  This is  causing databases  to  fall behind  the
     research. We believe that the  only solution to the resource shortfall  is
     to ask commercial  users to participate  by paying a  license fee. No  fee
     will be charged to academic users, nor will any restriction  be imposed on
     their use or reuse of the data. both SWISS-PROT and  PROSITE are concerned
     by these changes while this is not the case of ENZYME.

     A document fully  describing what will  be the impact  of this change  for
     SWISS-PROT is  available with  the SWISS-PROT  distribution  files on  FTP
     (SP_98.TXT). You can also  access the document as  well as other  relevant
     ones from:

                           http://www.expasy.ch/announce/
                           http://www.ebi.ac.uk/news.html

     If you do  not have the  time to  read this document,  the most  important
     take-home message is that these changes should not have any  impact on the
     way SWISS-PROT or  PROSITE are accessed  or redistributed. Academic  users
     will not be affected by these changes. Industrial end-users will  also not
     directly be affected as long  as their employer pays the license  fee. The
     same  holds  true  for  bioinformatics  companies.  Academic  software  or
     database developers as well as providers of database distribution services
     will be only minimally affected  by these changes. We  hope to be able  to
     keep the  spirit of  SWISS-PROT and  PROSITE alive  and at  the same  time ensure their long-term financial survival.  We sincerely hope and  believe
     that in the next two  years the only change that  will matter will be  the
     increase in scope and timeliness of the databases.

     Finally, it should be noted  that release 36 of SWISS-PROT and  release 15
     of PROSITE are not concerned  by these changes. There are no  restrictions
     on their use and their distribution.

       ========================================================================


                             APPENDIX A: SOME STATISTICS


       A.1  Amino acid composition

            A.1.1  Composition in percent for the complete data bank

       Ala (A) 7.58   Gln (Q) 3.99   Leu (L) 9.42   Ser (S) 7.15
       Arg (R) 5.14   Glu (E) 6.35   Lys (K) 5.93   Thr (T) 5.69
       Asn (N) 4.47   Gly (G) 6.83   Met (M) 2.37   Trp (W) 1.24
       Asp (D) 5.28   His (H) 2.24   Phe (F) 4.08   Tyr (Y) 3.18
       Cys (C) 1.67   Ile (I) 5.80   Pro (P) 4.91   Val (V) 6.56

       Asx (B) 0.001  Glx (Z) 0.001  Xaa (X) 0.01


            A.1.2  Classification of the amino acids by their frequency

       Leu, Ala, Ser, Gly, Val, Glu, Lys, Ile, Thr, Asp, Arg, Pro, Asn, Phe,
       Gln, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp



       A.2  Repartition of the sequences by their organism of origin

       Total number of species represented in this release of SWISS-PROT: 6002

       The first twenty species represent 35826 sequences: 48.4 % of the total
       number of entries.


       A.2.1 Table of the frequency of occurrence of species

            Species represented 1x: 2754
                                2x:  951
                                3x:  479
                                4x:  332
                                5x:  238
                                6x:  212
                                7x:  159
                                8x:   99
                                9x:  102
                               10x:   73
                           11- 20x:  277
                           21- 50x:  176
                           51-100x:   72
                             >100x:   78


       A.2.2  Table of the most represented species

        Number   Frequency          Species
             1        4980          Human
             2        4787          Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
             3        4416          Escherichia coli
             4        3253          Mouse
             5        2491          Rat
             6        1970          Bacillus subtilis
             7        1887          Caenorhabditis elegans
             8        1693          Haemophilus influenzae
             9        1315          Fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
            10        1283          Methanococcus jannaschii
            11        1088          Bovine
            12        1042          Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
            13         873          Mycobacterium tuberculosis
            14         840          Chicken
            15         719          Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse-ear cress)
            16         706          Salmonella typhimurium
            17         697          African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis)
            18         616          Synechocystis sp. (strain PCC 6803)
            19         607          Pig
            20         563          Rabbit
            21         489          Mycoplasma pneumoniae
            22         470          Mycoplasma genitalium
            23         406          Maize
            24         403          Rhizobium sp. (strain NGR234)
            25         345          Pseudomonas aeruginosa
            26         334          Helicobacter pylori
            27         304          Rice
            28         284          Dog
            29         280          Slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum)
            30         278          Tobacco
            31         273          Bacteriophage T4
            32         253          Vaccinia virus (strain Copenhagen)
            33         250          Mycobacterium leprae
            34         244          Sheep
            35         240          Pea
            36         219          Porphyra purpurea
            37         215          Barley
            38         212          Staphylococcus aureus
            39         209          Neurospora crassa
            40         208          Soybean
            41         205          Wheat
            42         195          Tomato
            43         193          Rhodobacter capsulatus
                       193          Human cytomegalovirus (strain AD169)
            45         192          Candida albicans
                       192          Potato
            47         191          Klebsiella pneumoniae
            48         190          Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum
            49         185          Bacillus stearothermophilus
            50         184          Vaccinia virus (strain WR)
            51         178          Pseudomonas putida
            52         164          Agrobacterium tumefaciens
            53         160          Spinach
                       160          Guinea pig
            55         158          Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
            56         157          Rhizobium meliloti
            57         154          Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus
            58         150          Marchantia polymorpha (Liverwort)
            59         146          Variola virus
                       146          Cyanophora paradoxa
            61         145          Aspergillus nidulans
            62         139          Odontella sinensis
            63         136          Streptomyces coelicolor
                       136          Golden hamster
                       136          Lactococcus lactis (subsp. lactis)
            66         134          Orgyia pseudotsugata multicapsid polyhedrosis virus
            67         130          Horse
            68         127          Kluyveromyces lactis
            69         125          Thermus aquaticus (subsp. thermophilus)
            70         124          Trypanosoma brucei brucei
            71         122          Synechococcus sp. (strain PCC 7942)
            72         114          Anabaena sp. (strain PCC 7120)
            73         113          Bradyrhizobium japonicum
            74         111          Alcaligenes eutrophus
            75         110          Bombyx mori (Silk moth)
            76         107          Archaeoglobus fulgidus
            77         105          Yersinia enterocolitica
            78         101          Brassica napus (Rape)



       A.3  Repartition of the sequences by size

                   From   To  Number             From   To   Number
                      1-  50    3048             1001-1100      667
                     51- 100    6272             1101-1200      511
                    101- 150    9004             1201-1300      348
                    151- 200    7032             1301-1400      233
                    201- 250    6626             1401-1500      193
                    251- 300    6172             1501-1600      119
                    301- 350    5852             1601-1700      112
                    351- 400    5882             1701-1800       86
                    401- 450    4500             1801-1900       91
                    451- 500    4176             1901-2000       58
                    501- 550    3138             2001-2100       33
                    551- 600    2191             2101-2200       68
                    601- 650    1688             2201-2300       67
                    651- 700    1221             2301-2400       35
                    701- 750    1095             2401-2500       41
                    751- 800     891             >2500          207
                    801- 850     685
                    851- 900     736
                    901- 950     509
                    951-1000     432



       A.4  Longest sequences

       The longest sequences (>=4000 residues) are listed here:

                                   HTS1_COCCA  5217
                                   MUC2_HUMAN  5179
                                   FAT_DROME   5147
                                   RYNR_RABIT  5037
                                   RYNR_PIG    5035
                                   RYNR_HUMAN  5032
                                   RYNC_RABIT  4969
                                   LRP_CAEEL   4753
                                   DYHC_DICDI  4725
                                   PLEC_RAT    4687
                                   LRP2_RAT    4660
                                   DYHC_RAT    4644
                                   DYHC_DROME  4639
                                   DYHC_CAEEL  4568
                                   DYHB_CHLRE  4568
                                   APB_HUMAN   4563
                                   APOA_HUMAN  4548
                                   LRP1_HUMAN  4544
                                   LRP1_CHICK  4543
                                   DYHC_PARTE  4540
                                   RRPA_CVMJH  4488
                                   DYHG_CHLRE  4485
                                   DYHC_ANTCR  4466
                                   DYHC_TRIGR  4466
                                   GRSB_BACBR  4451
                                   PKSK_BACSU  4447
                                   PKSL_BACSU  4427
                                   PGBM_HUMAN  4393
                                   YP73_CAEEL  4385
                                   DYHC_NEUCR  4367
                                   DYHC_NECHA  4349
                                   DYHC_EMENI  4344
                                   PKD1_HUMAN  4303
                                   DYHC_SCHPO  4196
                                   DYHC_YEAST  4092
                                   RRPA_CVH22  4085


       A.5  Statistics for journal citations


       Total number of journals cited in this release of SWISS-PROT: 913


       A.5.1 Table of the frequency of journal citations

            Journals cited 1x: 339
                           2x: 124
                           3x:  70
                           4x:  39
                           5x:  37
                           6x:  23
                           7x:  17
                           8x:  15
                           9x:  14
                          10x:  10
                      11- 20x:  63
                      21- 50x:  65
                      51-100x:  24
                        >100x:  73


       A.5.2  List of the most cited journals in SWISS-PROT

       Nb    Citations       Journal abbreviation
       --    ---------       ----------------------------------
        1    6303            J. BIOL. CHEM.
        2    3814            PROC. NATL. ACAD. SCI. U.S.A.
        3    3384            NUCLEIC ACIDS RES.
        4    2714            J. BACTERIOL.
        5    2498            GENE
        6    2058            FEBS LETT.
        7    1932            EUR. J. BIOCHEM.
        8    1780            BIOCHEM. BIOPHYS. RES. COMMUN.
        9    1732            BIOCHEMISTRY
       10    1713            EMBO J.
       11    1617            NATURE
       12    1438            BIOCHIM. BIOPHYS. ACTA
       13    1339            J. MOL. BIOL.
       14    1228            CELL
       15    1184            MOL. CELL. BIOL.
       16     953            MOL. GEN. GENET.
       17     929            PLANT MOL. BIOL.
       18     888            BIOCHEM. J.
       19     873            GENOMICS
       20     808            SCIENCE
       21     768            MOL. MICROBIOL.
       22     764            VIROLOGY
       23     682            J. BIOCHEM.
       24     515            J. VIROL.
       25     464            YEAST
       26     461            J. CELL BIOL.
       27     445            J. GEN. VIROL.
       28     417            PLANT PHYSIOL.
       29     407            GENES DEV.
       30     376            HUM. MOL. GENET.
       31     346            J. IMMUNOL.
       32     342            HUM. MUTAT.
       33     323            ARCH. BIOCHEM. BIOPHYS.
       34     319            CURR. GENET.
       35     312            ONCOGENE
       36     312            INFECT. IMMUN.
       37     305            MOL. BIOCHEM. PARASITOL.
       38     270            FEMS MICROBIOL. LETT.
       39     264            BIOL. CHEM. HOPPE-SEYLER
       40     261            STRUCTURE
       41     254            AM. J. HUM. GENET.
       42     247            NAT. GENET.
       43     239            DEVELOPMENT
       44     237            MOL. ENDOCRINOL.
       45     234            J. CLIN. INVEST.
       46     218            J. MOL. EVOL.
       47     218            J. GEN. MICROBIOL.
       48     213            HOPPE-SEYLER'S Z. PHYSIOL. CHEM.
       49     204            MICROBIOLOGY
       50     202            GENETICS
       51     191            HUM. GENET.
       52     188            NAT. STRUCT. BIOL.
       53     186            DNA CELL BIOL.
       54     182            J. EXP. MED.
       55     181            BLOOD
       56     175            DEV. BIOL.
       57     174            APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.
       58     172            NEURON
       59     157            PROTEIN SCI.
       60     153            DNA
       61     145            IMMUNOGENETICS
       62     137            ENDOCRINOLOGY
       63     136            DNA SEQ.
       64     125            PLANT CELL
       65     115            HEMOGLOBIN
       66     113            CANCER RES.
       67     113            BIOCHIMIE
       68     109            J. NEUROCHEM.
       69     109            BIOORG. KHIM.
       70     108            MOL. BIOL. EVOL.
       71     107            AGRIC. BIOL. CHEM.
       72     106            BRAIN RES. MOL. BRAIN RES.
       73     105            PLANT J.


       ========================================================================


       APPENDIX B: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN SWISS-PROT AND SOME BIOMOLECULAR
                   DATABASES

       The current  status of  the relationships (cross-references) between
       SWISS-PROT and some biomolecular databases is shown in the following
       schematic:


                             ***********************
                             *  EMBL Nucleotide    *
                             *  Sequence Database  *
                             *       [EBI]         *
                             ***********************
                               ^ ^ ^  ^  ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * FlyBase        * <-------+ | |  I  | | | | +-------> * MGD [Mouse]        *
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
                               | | |  I  | | | | |
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * SubtiList      * <---------+ |  I  | | | +---------> * GCRDb [7TM recep.] *
    * [B.subtilis]   *         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |
                               | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************         | | |  I  | | +-----------> * EcoGene [E.coli]   *
    * Mendel [Plant] * <-----+ | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************       | | | |  I  | | | | |
                             | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************       | | | |  I  +---------------> * SGD [Yeast]        *
    * MaizeDb        * <-----------+  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * [Zea mays]     *       | | | |  I  | | | | |
    ******************       | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
                             | | | |  I  | +-------------> * DictyDB [D.disco.] *
    ******************       | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * WormPep        *       | | | |  I  | | | | |
    * [C.elegans]    * <---+ | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************     | | | | |  I  | | | | | +-----> * ENZYME [Nomencl.]  *
                           | | | | |  I  | | | | | |       **********************
    ******************     | v v v v  v  v v v v v v           v
    * REBASE         *     *************************       **********************
    * [Restriction   * <-- *   SWISS-PROT          * ----> * OMIM [Human]       *
    *  enzymes]      *     *   Protein Sequence    *       **********************
    ******************     *   Data Bank           *
                           *************************       **********************
    ******************      ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ | ^ ^ ^          * ECO2DBASE     [2D] *
    * StyGene        *      | | | | | | | | | | +--------> **********************
    * [S.Typhimurium]* <----+ | | | | | | | | |
    ******************        | | | | | | | | |            **********************
                              | | | | | | | | +----------> * Maize-2DPAGE  [2D] *
    ******************        | | | | | | | |              **********************
    * Transfac       * <------+ | | | | | | |
    ******************          | | | | | | |              **********************
                                | | | | | | +------------> * SWISS-2DPAGE  [2D] *
    ******************          | | | | | |                **********************
    * Harefield [2D] * <--------+ | | | | |
    ******************            | | | | |                **********************
                                  | | | | +--------------> * Aarhus/Ghent  [2D] *
    ******************            | | | |                  **********************
    * PROSITE        *            | | | |
    * [Patterns and  * <----------+ | | +----------------> **********************
    * profiles]      *              | |                    * YEPD [Yeast]  [2D] *
    ******************              | +----------------+   **********************
                 |                  v                  |
                 |          ***********************    +-> **********************
                 +--------> * PDB [3D structures] * <----- * HSSP [3D similar.] *
                            ***********************        **********************

       =End=of=SWISS-PROT=release=36=notes=====================================
      
