---
title: Swiss-Prot release 40.0
categories: sp-major
---

      -------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               SWISS-PROT Protein Knowledgebase
                                                                  Release Notes
                                                       Release 40, October 2001
      -------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                 Table of contents

     1   Introduction
     2   Description of the changes made to SWISS-PROT since release 38
     3   Forthcoming changes
     4   Status of the documentation files
     5   The ExPASy World-Wide Web server
     6   TrEMBL - a supplement to SWISS-PROT
     7   FTP access to SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL
     8   ENZYME and PROSITE
     9   We need your help!
     A   Appendix A

                                 1   Introduction

    Release 40.0 of SWISS-PROT contains 101'602 sequence entries, comprising
    37'315'215 amino acids abstracted from 91'880 references. This represents
    an increase of 18% over release 39. The growth of the data bank is
    summarized below.

          Release     Date    Number of   Number of
                               entries   amino acids
            2.0      09/86      3'939       900'163
            3.0      11/86      4'160       969'641
            4.0      04/87      4'387     1'036'010
            5.0      09/87      5'205     1'327'683
            6.0      01/88      6'102     1'653'982
            7.0      04/88      6'821     1'885'771
            8.0      08/88      7'724     2'224'465
            9.0      11/88      8'702     2'498'140
            10.0     03/89     10'008     2'952'613
            11.0     07/89     10'856     3'265'966
            12.0     10/89     12'305     3'797'482
            13.0     01/90     13'837     4'347'336
            14.0     04/90     15'409     4'914'264
            15.0     08/90     16'941     5'486'399
            16.0     11/90     18'364     5'986'949
            17.0     02/91     20'024     6'524'504
            18.0     05/91     20'772     6'792'034
            19.0     08/91     21'795     7'173'785
            20.0     11/91     22'654     7'500'130
            21.0     03/92     23'742     7'866'596
            22.0     05/92     25'044     8'375'696
            23.0     08/92     26'706     9'011'391
            24.0     12/92     28'154     9'545'427
            25.0     04/93     29'955    10'214'020
            26.0     07/93     31'808    10'875'091
            27.0     10/93     33'329    11'484'420
            28.0     02/94     36'000    12'496'420
            29.0     06/94     38'303    13'464'008
            30.0     10/94     40'292    14'147'368
            31.0     02/95     43'470    15'335'248
            32.0     11/95     49'340    17'385'503
            33.0     02/96     52'205    18'531'384
            34.0     10/96     59'021    21'210'389
            35.0     11/97     69'113    25'083'768
            36.0     07/98     74'019    26'840'295
            37.0     12/98     77'977    28'268'293
            38.0     07/99     80'000    29'085'965
            39.0     05/00     86'593    31'411'114
            40.0     10/01    101'602    37'315'215

        2   Description of the changes made to SWISS-PROT since release 38

    The name of the database changed from 'SWISS-PROT protein sequence
    database' to 'SWISS-PROT knowledgebase' to emphasize the fact that
    SWISS-PROT collects, by far, more than just information on protein
    sequences and that it is a central linking and linked database which
    connects the various findings in the diverse fields of proteomics research.

    We apologize that due to technical problems we never posted the release
    notes of release 39. Therefore this document describes the changes that
    took place not only since release 39 but also those between releases 38 and
    39.

         2.1   Sequences and annotations

    15'184 sequences have been added since release 39, the sequence data of
    2'908 existing entries has been updated and the annotations of 44' 684
    entries have been revised. With this release SWISS-PROT has passed the
    symbolic mark of 100 thousand entries.

         2.2   The HPI project

    The Human Proteomics Initiative (HPI) has been introduced to put a major
    effort on the annotation of all known human sequences according to the
    quality standards of SWISS-PROT. This means that, for each known protein, a
    wealth of information is provided, which includes the description of its
    function, its domain structure, subcellular location, posttranslational
    modifications, variants, similarities to other proteins, etc. This not only
    implies the annotation of newly detected proteins, but also the integration
    of new research data to the existing entries by specialized biologists, who
    are in close contact with experts all over the world.

    There are currently 7'471 annotated human sequences in SWISS-PROT. These
    entries are associated with 19'922 literature references, 18' 974
    experimental or predicted PTM's, 1'697 splice variants and 12'061
    polymorphisms (most of which are linked with disease states).

    Simultaneously, two further efforts were increased: the description of
    human diseases associated with deficiency(ies) in the protein and mammalian
    orthologs of human proteins are annotated at a level equivalent to that of
    the cognate human sequences.

    For all aspects of the HPI projects, we would appreciate the help and
    collaboration of the scientific community. Information concerning the human
    proteome is highly critical to a large section of the life science
    community. We therefore appeal to the user community to fully participate
    in this initiative by providing all the necessary information to help and
    to speed up the comprehensive annotation of the human proteome.

    For a detailed description of the HPI project and its current status please
    consult:

         http://www.expasy.org/sprot/hpi/

         2.3   The HAMAP project

    The first complete microbial genomic sequence was that of the bacterium
    Haemophilus influenzae, which became available in 1995. Since then more
    than 50 bacterial and archaeal genomes have been sequenced and many more
    sequencing projects of pathogenic as well as nonpathogenic microbes are in
    progress. To date, the publicly available microbial genomes collectively
    encode more than 100'000 different proteins.

    In order to handle the large amount of "raw" data coming from the microbial
    genomic sequencing, the High quality Automated Microbial Annotation of
    Proteomes (HAMAP) project was initiated. The latter aims to automatically
    annotate a significant percentage of proteins which originate from
    microbial genome sequencing projects.

    To maintain a high level quality of annotation, specific tools are
    developed to deal with two completely separate subsets of bacterial and
    archaeal proteins: proteins that have no recognizable similarity to any
    other microbial or non-microbial proteins ("ORFans") and proteins that are
    part of well-defined families or subfamilies. This is done by using a rule
    system that describes the level and extent of annotations that can be
    assigned by similarity with a prototype manually-annotated entry. The
    result is a curated entry whose quality is identical to that produced
    manually by an expert annotator.

    The programs in development are designed to recognize protein
    peculiarities, and only proteins which match the defined criteria will be
    processed automatically. Protein sequences which fail to fit into that rule
    system will be further analyzed by SWISS-PROT expert annotators.

    For a detailed description of the HAMAP project and its current status
    please consult:

         http://www.expasy.org/sprot/hamap/

         2.4   What's happening with the model organisms?

    We have selected a number of organisms that are the target of genome
    sequencing and/or mapping projects and for which we intend to:

       * be as complete as possible. All sequences available at a given time
         should be immediately included in SWISS-PROT. This also includes
         sequence corrections and updates;
       * provide a higher level of annotation;
       * provide cross-references to specialized database(s) that contain,
         among other data, some genetic information about the genes that code
         for these proteins;
       * provide specific indices or documents.

    From our efforts to annotate human sequence entries as complete as possible
    arose the HPI project (see 2.2), and the bacterial model organisms became
    part of the HAMAP project (see 2.3). Here is the current status of the
    model organisms which are not covered by these two projects:

          Organism        Database          Index file     Number of
                          cross-references                 sequences
          ------------    ----------------  -------------- ---------
          A.thaliana      None yet          In preparation     1'409
          C.albicans      None yet          CALBICAN.TXT         256
          C.elegans       Wormpep           CELEGANS.TXT       2'184
          D.discoideum    DictyDB           DICTY.TXT            311
          D.melanogaster  FlyBase           FLY.TXT            1'514
          M.musculus      MGD               MGDTOSP.TXT        4'816
          S.cerevisiae    SGD               YEAST.TXT          4'859
          S.pombe         None yet          POMBE.TXT          1'782

         2.5   Progress in the conversion of SWISS-PROT to mixed-case
               characters

    We are gradually converting SWISS-PROT entries from all 'UPPER CASE' to
    'MiXeD CaSe'. The line-types that have been converted between release 38
    and 40 are: DE (DEscription), most RC (Reference Comment) topics (SPECIES,
    TISSUE, PLASMID and TRANSPOSON) and DR (Database cross-Reference). The new
    OX line (Organism cross-reference; see section 2.8) and the new CC topics
    PHARMACEUTICAL and BIOTECHNOLOGY (described in section 2.11) have been
    introduced in mixed case. The CC topic MASS SPECTROMETRY has been converted
    to mixed case. As described in section 3.5, the process of converting all
    of SWISS-PROT to mixed case continues.

         2.6   Extension of the accession number system

    With the creation of the TrEMBL database and the rapid increase in the
    amount of sequence data, we were faced with a problem of availability of
    accession numbers. We used a system based on a one-letter prefix followed
    by 5 digits. This system was also used by the nucleotide sequence databases
    which had originally reserved for SWISS-PROT the prefix letters 'O', 'P'
    and 'Q'. Having run out of space (due mainly to EST's), the nucleotide
    sequence databases have been forced to choose a new format, which became a
    two-letter prefix followed by 6 digits.

    We have now used up all possible numbers with 'O', 'P' and 'Q'. As we
    believe that changing the format of the accession numbers to that used now
    by the nucleotide database would have created havoc on the numerous
    software packages using SWISS-PROT, we decided to keep a system of
    accession numbers based on a 6-character code, but with the following
    format extension:

      1       2     3          4          5          6
      [O,P,Q] [0-9] [A-Z, 0-9] [A-Z, 0-9] [A-Z, 0-9] [0-9]

    What the above means is that we kept a 6-character code, but that in
    positions 3, 4 and 5 of this code any combination of letters and numbers
    can be present. This format allows a total of 14 million accession numbers
    (compared with only 300'000 with the former system).

    We only allow numbers in positions 2 and 6 so that the SWISS-PROT accession
    numbers cannot be mistaken with gene names, acronyms, other type of
    accession numbers or any kind of word!

    Examples: P0A3S2, Q2ASD4, O13YX2, P9B123.

         2.7   Multiple AC lines

    Starting from release 39, there can be more than one AC (ACcession) line
    per SWISS-PROT entry. Strictly speaking this was not a format change and
    the SWISS-PROT user's manual always indicated that there could be more than
    one AC line per entry. Until recently, a single line was sufficient and the
    majority of entries contained only a single accession number. But, in the
    process of providing an optimally non-redundant database, we are merging
    information from TrEMBL entries into SWISS-PROT entries. When we merge a
    TrEMBL entry to a SWISS-PROT one, we add to the latter the accession
    number(s) of the TrEMBL entry. The repetition of such a process sometimes
    produces an accession number list which can no longer fit in a single AC
    line. Therefore there are now some entries with two, three (as shown below)
    or more AC lines.

    AC   P16070; P22511; Q04858; Q13419; Q13957; Q13958; Q13959; Q13960;
    AC   Q13961; Q13967; Q13968; Q13980; Q15861; Q16064; Q16065; Q16066;
    AC   Q16208; Q16522;

         2.8   Introduction of the new line type OX: Organism taxonomy
         cross-reference

    The OX (Organism taXonomy cross-reference) line has been introduced to
    indicate the identifier to a specific organism in a taxonomic database. The
    number of taxonomic codes is identical to the number of species given in
    the OS line. There can be more than one OX line in an entry and its format
    is:

    OX   Taxonomy-database_Qualifier=Taxonomic code[, Taxonomic code...];

    There are cross-references to the taxonomic database of NCBI, which is
    associated with the qualifier 'TaxID' and a one-to six-digit taxonomic
    code.

    Examples of its usage:

    OX   NCBI_TaxID=10116;

    OX   NCBI_TaxID=9606, 10090, 9913, 9823, 10141, 10029, 10030, 10116, 9986,

    OX   9031, 8355, 7227, 7213, 7108, 7130;

         2.9   Changes concerning the RC line

    We are gradually implementing controlled vocabularies for the different
    type of RC tokens. To complement the tissue list (TISSLIST.TXT), we have
    now added a plasmid list (PLASMID.TXT) and are in the process of creating a
    strain list. Controlled vocabularies are part of the SWISS-PROT
    documentation files that are all described in section 4.

         2.10   Changes concerning the RX line

    The RX line format changed, and it now provides identifiers also to the
    bibliographic database PubMed.

    The old format was:

    RX   MEDLINE; unique_identifier.

    The new format is:

    RX   BIBLIOGRAPHIC_DATABASE=IDENTIFIER[; BIBLIOGRAPHIC_DATABASE=IDENTIFIER...];

    Example of RX lines:

    RX   PubMed=9145897;
    RX   MEDLINE=79012484; PubMed=358200;

         2.11   Introduction of two new CC line topics: BIOTECHNOLOGY and
         PHARMACEUTICAL

    We have introduced two new 'topics' for the comments (CC) line type.

    The topic 'BIOTECHNOLOGY' has been introduced to describe the use of a
    specific protein in the biotechnological industry. This topic contains the
    name(s) of the compani(es) that produce the protein or the genetically
    manipulated organism as well as a short description of the biotechnological
    function of the protein. The brand name(s), under which a protein is
    available, is added, if applicable.

    Examples of the usage:

    CC   -!- BIOTECHNOLOGY: Introduced by genetic manipulation and
    CC       expressed in improved ripening tomato by Monsanto. ACC is the
    CC       immediate precursor of the phytohormone ethylene who is
    CC       involved in the control of ripening. ACC deaminase reduces
    CC       ethylene biosynthesis and thus extend the shelf life of fruits
    CC       and vegetables.

    CC   -!- BIOTECHNOLOGY: Used in the food industry for high temperature
    CC       liquefaction of starch-containing mashes and in the detergent
    CC       industry to remove starch. Sold under the name Termamyl by
    CC       Novozymes.

    The topic 'PHARMACEUTICAL' has been introduced to describe the use of a
    specific protein as a pharmaceutical drug. The information provided by such
    a topic will include the brand name(s) under which a protein is available,
    the name(s) of the compani(es) that produce it as well as a short
    description of the therapeutic usage of the protein. It should be noted
    that any entries containing such a comment field will also be tagged with
    the keyword 'Pharmaceutical'.

    Examples of the usage:

    CC   -!- PHARMACEUTICAL: Available under the names Avonex (Biogen),
    CC       Betaseron (Berlex) and Rebif (Serono). Used in the treatment
    CC       of multiple sclerosis (MS). Betaseron is a slightly modified
    CC       form of IFNB1 with two residue substitutions.

    CC   -!- PHARMACEUTICAL: Available under the name Proleukin (Chiron).
    CC       Used in patients with renal cell carcinoma or metastatic
    CC       melanoma.

         2.12   Cleaning up of comment line (CC) topics

    We are continuing a major overhaul of various comment line topics. We would
    like the majority of the information stored to be usable by computer
    programs (while being human-readable). We are therefore standardizing the
    format of the topics.

    The two sub-formats of the topic ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS:

    CC   -!- ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS:  isoforms;  (shown here),
    CC      ,  and ; are produced by alternative splicing.
    CC       [Comment.]

    CC   -!- ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS:  isoforms;  (shown here),
    CC        and ; are produced by alternative
    CC       initiation. [Comment.]

    Examples:

    CC   -!- ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS: At least 5 isoforms; 1 (shown here), 2, 3, 4
    CC       and 5; are produced by alternative splicing. They differ in their
    CC       acetylcholine receptor clustering activity.

    CC   -!- ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS: 3 isoforms; TRAC-2 (shown here), TRAC-3 and
    CC       TRAC-4; are produced by alternative initiation.

    We are gradually cleaning up the comment line topic SIMILARITY. To describe
    the similarity of the protein to a protein family, we use the following
    subformat:

    CC   -!- SIMILARITY: Belongs to the <family_name>[. <sub-family_name>].

    Examples:

    CC   -!- SIMILARITY: Belongs to the 14-3-3 family.

    CC   -!- SIMILARITY: Belongs to the glucosamine/galactosamine-6-phosphate
    CC       isomerase family. 6-phosphogluconolactonase subfamily.

    To describe conserved domains within a protein sequence, we use the
    subformat:

    CC   -!- SIMILARITY: Contains n <domain_name>.

    Examples:

    CC   -!- SIMILARITY: Contains 10 HEAT repeats.
    CC   -!- SIMILARITY: Contains 1 FKBP-type PPIase domain.

         2.13   Changes concerning cross-references (DR line)

    We have added cross-references from SWISS-PROT to the following databases:

         2.13.1   GlycoSuiteDB

    GlycoSuiteDB, a database of glycan structures available at
    http://www.glycosuite.com/ (see Cooper C.A., Harrison M.J., Wilkins M.R.
    and Packer N.H.; Nucleic Acids Res. 29:332-335(2001)). The identifiers of
    the appropriate DR line are:

     Data bank
     identifier:         GlycoSuiteDB
     Primary identifier: GlycoSuiteDB unique identifier for a glycoprotein,
                         which is identical to the SWISS-PROT primary AC
                         number of that protein.
     Secondary
     identifier:         None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:            DR   GlycoSuiteDB; P05067; -.

         2.13.2   SMART

    The Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool (SMART), a database of
    functional sites available at http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/ (see Schultz
    J., Copley R.R., Doerks T., Ponting C.P. and Bork P.; Nucleic Acids Res.
    28:231-234(2000)). The cross-references for this database are composed of
    the following items:

     Data bank identifier: SMART
     Primary identifier:   SMART unique identifier for a domain.
     Secondary identifier: Abbreviation for the name of a domain or module.
     Fourth item:          Number of hits of the domain in the entry.
     Example:              DR   SMART; SM00370; LRR; 6.

         2.13.3   Leproma

    The Mycobacterium leprae genome database Leproma, which is available at
    http://genolist.pasteur.fr/Leproma/. The information is available in the DR
    line:

     Data bank identifier: Leproma
     Primary identifier:   Leproma unique identifer for an ORF.
     Secondary identifier: None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:              DR   Leproma; ML0485; -.

         2.13.4   MEROPS

    MEROPS, the protease database available at http://www.merops.co.uk/ (see
    Rawlings N.D. and Barrett A.J.; Nucleic Acids Res. 28:323-325(2000)). The
    following information is available in the two qualifiers of the DR line:

     Data bank identifier: MEROPS
     Primary identifier:   The MEROPS unique identifier for a peptidase.
     Secondary identifier: None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:              DR   MEROPS; M41.001; -.

         2.13.5   MypuList

    The Mycoplasma pulmonis genome database MypuList, available at
    http://genolist.pasteur.fr/MypuList/. The following information is
    available in the two identifiers of the DR line:

     Data bank identifier: MypuList
     Primary identifier:   The MypuList unique identifier for an ORF.
     Secondary identifier: None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:              DR   MypuList; MYPU_4900; -.

         2.13.6   ProDom

    Cross-references to the ProDom protein domain database used to be provided
    as implicit links; links are now also available as explicit links:

     Data bank identifier:  ProDom
     Primary identifier:    The ProDom unique identifier for a domain.
     Secondary identifier:  The ProDom entry name.
     Fourth item:           Number of hits of the domain in the entry.
     Example for an         DR   ProDom; PD000600; 14-3-3; 1.
     explicit link:

         2.13.7   ANU-2DPAGE

    The Australian National University Two-Dimensional Polyacrylamide Gel
    Electrophoresis Database (ANU-2DPAGE) is available at
    http://semele.anu.edu.au/2d/2d.html (see Imin N., Kerim T., Weinman J.J.
    and Rolfe B.G.; Proteomics 1:1149-1161(2001)). The following information is
    available in the DR line:

     Data bank
     identifier:          ANU-2DPAGE
     Primary identifier:  ANU-2DPAGE unique identifier, which is identical to
                          the SWISS-PROT primary AC number of that protein.
     Secondary
     identifier:          None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:             DR   ANU-2DPAGE; Q9XEA8; -.

         2.13.8   COMPLUYEAST-2DPAGE

    Two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis database at Universidad
    Complutense de Madrid (COMPLUYEAST-2DPAGE) is available at
    http://babbage.csc.ucm.es/2d/2d.html. The following informaiton is
    available in the DR line:

     Data bank
     identifier:        COMPLUYEAST-2DPAGE
     Primary            COMPLUYEAST-2DPAGE unique identifier, which is
     identifier:        identical to the SWISS-PROT primary AC number of that
                        protein.
     Secondary
     identifier:        None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:           DR   COMPLUYEAST-2DPAGE; P43067; -.

         2.13.9   PHCI-2DPAGE

    The Parasite Host Cell Interaction 2D-PAGE database (PHCI-2DPAGE) is
    available at http://www.gram.au.dk/2d/2d.html. The cross-references for
    this database are composed of the following items:

     Data bank
     identifier:          PHCI-2DPAGE
     Primary identifier:  PHCI-2DPAGE unique identifier, which is identical to
                          the SWISS-PROT primary AC number of that protein.
     Secondary
     identifier:          None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:             DR   PHCI-2DPAGE; Q9Z6V3; -.

         2.13.10   PMMA-2DPAGE

    The Purkyne Military Medical Academy 2D-PAGE database (PMMA-2DPAGE) is
    available at http://www.pmma.pmfhk.cz/2d/2d.html. The identifers of the
    appropriate DR line are:

     Data bank
     identifier:          PMMA-2DPAGE
     Primary identifier:  PMMA-2DPAGE unique identifier, which is identical to
                          the SWISS-PROT primary AC number of that protein.
     Secondary
     identifier:          None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:             DR   PMMA-2DPAGE; Q01995; -.

         2.13.11   Siena-2DPAGE

    The 2D-PAGE database from the Department of Molecular Biology, University
    of Siena, Italy, is available at http://www.bio-mol.unisi.it/2d/2d.html.
    The components of the corresponding DR line are:

     Data bank
     identifier:         Siena-2DPAGE
     Primary identifier: Siena-2DPAGE unique identifier, which is identical to
                         the SWISS-PROT primary AC number of that protein.
     Secondary
     identifier:         None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:            DR   Siena-2DPAGE; P01591; -.

         2.14   Introduction of a new FT key: SE_CYS

    Selenocysteine is the 21st 'natural' amino acid. It is now known to occur
    in several prokaryotic and eukaryotic proteins. Its mRNA codon is UGA,
    which usually serves as a stop codon, but with a specific downstream
    sequence forming a loop and a specific translational elongation factor. It
    is recognized as the site of selenocysteine incorporation into proteins.

    The joint nomenclature committee of the IUPAC/IUBMB (see
    http://www.chem.qmw.ac.uk/iupac/jcbn/) officially recommended
    (http://www.chem.qmw.ac.uk/iubmb/newsletter/1999/item3.html) a three-letter
    and a one-letter symbol for selenocysteine, namely 'Sec' and 'U'.

    Introducing a new one-letter code in the sequence records would have
    disrupt most, if not all, sequence analysis software. We therefore decided
    to change, in SWISS-PROT, the rules used to annotate the presence of
    selenocysteine residues in sequence entries in the manner described below.

    Selenocysteines were stored, in the sequence records, using the one-letter
    symbol 'C' for cysteine and are indicated in the feature table (FT) by a
    line of the type:

    FT   BINDING       x      x       SELENIUM.

    The one-letter code has not been changed (for the reason explained above),
    but we introduced a specific feature key (SE_CYS) to indicate the presence
    of a selenocysteine at a given sequence position. The above example has
    therefore been changed to:

    FT   SE_CYS       x       x

    We also want to remind users that the keyword ' Selenocysteine' continues
    to be used to tag sequence entries that contain at least one such residue.

         2.15   Introduction of feature identifiers to the feature keys
         CARBOHYD and VARIANT

    We have introduced unique and stable feature identifiers (FTId) which allow
    to construct links directly from position-specific annotation in the
    feature table to specialized protein-related databases. Examples are
    databases specialized in certain types of posttranslational modifications
    of proteins, or in mutations. The FTId is always the last component in the
    feature description.

         2.15.1   Feature identifiers in FT VARIANT lines of human sequence
         entries

    The feature identifiers in the FT VARIANT lines of human sequence entries
    allow to refer to a sequence variation and serve as anchors for
    specifically directed links. A federated single human mutation database
    (HmutDB; http://www2.ebi.ac.uk/mutations/central/proposal.html) has been
    proposed, and the complete set of all FT VARIANT lines has been indexed for
    SRS at EBI (http://srs.ebi.ac.uk/), under the name SWISSCHANGE. The
    database SWISSCHANGE can be queried by SWISS-PROT FTIds.

    The format of FT VARIANT lines with feature identifiers is:

    FT   VARIANT       x      x        Description.
    FT                                 /FTId=VAR_number.

    Example:

    FT   VARIANT       3      3        A -> L.
    FT                                 /FTId=VAR_000001.

         2.15.2   Feature identifiers in FT CARBOHYD lines

    The same principle is used to further enhance the links to GlycoSuiteDB, an
    annotated database of glycan structures (see section 2.13.1). So in
    addition the explicit global link in the DR line, we create unique feature
    identifiers for each of the FT CARBOHYD lines, which will allow direct
    access to the glycan structure.

    The format of FT CARBOHYD lines with feature identifiers is:

    FT   CARBOHYD      x        x       Description.
    FT                                  /FTId=CAR_number.

    Example:

    FT   CARBOHYD    251      251       N-LINKED (GLCNAC...).
    FT                                  /FTId=CAR_000070.

         2.16   Change in the syntax of the SQ line

    The SQ (SeQuence header) line marks the beginning of the sequence data and
    gives a quick summary of its content. The format of the SQ line was:

    SQ   SEQUENCE  XXXX AA; XXXXXX MW;  XXXXXXXX CRC32;

    The last information item in the SQ line was a 32-bit CRC (Cyclic
    Redundancy Check) value which is computed from the sequence. As the number
    of available sequences is increasing rapidly, there are now a few cases
    where two sequences can share the same CRC32 (but none, which also share
    the same molecular weight 'MW' or number of amino acids 'AA' ). To address
    this issue we replaced the 32-bit CRC value by a 64-bit CRC. The format of
    the SQ line changed therefore to:

    SQ   SEQUENCE  XXXX AA; XXXXXX MW;  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX CRC64;

    Example:

    SQ   SEQUENCE   233 AA;  25630 MW;  146A1B48A1475C86 CRC64;


                              3   Forthcoming changes

         3.1   Version of SP in XML format

    A distribution version of SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL in XML format is being
    developed. The specifications of this new format will be described when it
    will be first implemented in TrEMBL.

         3.2   Extension of the entry name format

    We endeavor to assign meaningful entry names that facilitate the
    identification of the proteins and the species of origin concerning an
    entry. Currently the entry name consists of up to ten uppercase
    alphanumeric characters. SWISS-PROT uses a general purpose naming
    convention that can be symbolized as X_Y, where X is a mnemonic code of at
    most 4 alphanumeric characters representing the protein name, the '_' sign
    serves as a separator, and the Y is a mnemonic species identification code
    of at most 5 alphanumeric characters representing the biological source of
    the protein.

    We are planning to elongate the mnemonic code for the protein name from up
    to 4 characters to up to 5 characters. E.g. the mnemonic code for the
    meiotic recombination protein rec10 is currently 'RE10'. After the
    introduction of extended entry names it could be modified to the 5-letter
    code 'REC10'.

         3.3   Multiple RP lines

    Starting with release 41, there can be more than one RP (Reference
    Position) line per reference in a SWISS-PROT entry. The RP line describes
    the extent of the work carried out by the authors of the reference, e.g.
    molecule type that has been sequenced, the characterization of the protein,
    characterization of PTMs, analysis of the protein structure, detection of
    variants, etc.

    As the number of experimental results per publication increased over the
    years the limitation of using a single RP line per reference became more
    and more often insufficient to add all the information while being
    consistent in format. So we decided to have multiple RP lines.

    Example:

    RP   SEQUENCE FROM N.A., PARTIAL SEQUENCE, AND CHARACTERIZATION.

    could become

    RP   SEQUENCE FROM N.A., SEQUENCE OF 23-42 AND 351-365, AND
    RP   CHARACTERIZATION.

         3.4   Cleaning up of comment line (CC) topics

    We are continuing a major overhaul of various comment line topics. We would
    like the majority of the information stored to be usable by computer
    programs (while being human-readable). We are therefore standardizing the
    format of the topics.

    We are gradually cleaning up the comment line topic PATHWAY. To describe
    the biochemical pathway in which the protein is involved, we use the
    following format:

    CC   -!- PATHWAY: biochemical pathway; nth step[. Comment].

    Example:

    CC   -!- PATHWAY: Coenzyme A (CoA) biosynthesis; first step.

    The comment line topic COFACTOR will be modified gradually to the following
    format:

    CC   -!- COFACTOR: cofactor1[, cofactor2 and cofactor3][. Comment].

    Examples:

    CC   -!- COFACTOR: Magnesium.
    CC   -!- COFACTOR: Copper, Manganese, and Nickel.

         3.5   Continuation of the conversion of SWISS-PROT to mixed-case
         characters

    We will continue to convert SWISS-PROT entries from all 'UPPER CASE' to
    'MiXeD CaSe'. In release 41 we are planning to convert the GN (Gene Name)
    line, the RC (Reference Comment) line topic STRAIN, and the CC (Comment)
    line topics CATALYTIC ACTIVITY and PATHWAY.

    Here is an example of what a SWISS-PROT entry will look like in release 41:

    ID   GSA_ECOLI      STANDARD;      PRT;   426 AA.
    AC   P23893; P78277;
    DT   01-NOV-1991 (Rel. 20, Created)
    DT   01-NOV-1997 (Rel. 35, Last sequence update)
    DT   01-MAR-2002 (Rel. 41, Last annotation update)
    DE   Glutamate-1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutase (EC 5.4.3.8) (GSA)
    DE   (Glutamate-1-semialdehyde aminotransferase) (GSA-AT).
    GN   hemL or gsa or popC or B0154.
    OS   Escherichia coli.
    OC   Bacteria; Proteobacteria; gamma subdivision; Enterobacteriaceae;
    OC   Escherichia.
    OX   NCBI_TaxID=562;
    RN   [1]
    RP   SEQUENCE FROM N.A.
    RX   MEDLINE=91155920; PubMed=1900346;
    RA   Grimm B., Bull A., Breu V.;
    RT   "Structural genes of glutamate 1-semialdehyde aminotransferase for
    RT   porphyrin synthesis in a cyanobacterium and Escherichia coli.";
    RL   Mol. Gen. Genet. 225:1-10(1991).
    RN   [2]
    RP   SEQUENCE FROM N.A.
    RC   STRAIN=K12 / W3110;
    RX   MEDLINE=94261430; PubMed=8202364;
    RA   Fujita N., Mori H., Yura T., Ishihama A.;
    RT   "Systematic sequencing of the Escherichia coli genome: analysis of
    RT   the 2.4-4.1 min (110,917-193,643 bp) region.";
    RL   Nucleic Acids Res. 22:1637-1639(1994).
    RN   [3]
    RP   SEQUENCE FROM N.A.
    RC   STRAIN=K12 / MG1655;
    RX   MEDLINE=97426617; PubMed=9278503;
    RA   Blattner F.R., Plunkett G. III, Bloch C.A., Perna N.T., Burland V.,
    RA   Riley M., Collado-Vides J., Glasner J.D., Rode C.K., Mayhew G.F.,
    RA   Gregor J., Davis N.W., Kirkpatrick H.A., Goeden M.A., Rose D.J.,
    RA   Mau B., Shao Y.;
    RT   "The complete genome sequence of Escherichia coli K-12.";
    RL   Science 277:1453-1474(1997).
    RN   [4]
    RP   SEQUENCE FROM N.A.
    RA   Schramm S., Duncan M., Allen E., Araujo R., Aparicio A., Chung E.,
    RA   Davis K., Federspiel N., Hyman R., Kalman S., Komp C., Kurdi O.,
    RA   Lashkari D., Lew H., Lin D., Namath A., Oefner P., Roberts D.,
    RA   Davis R.W.;
    RL   Submitted (SEP-1996) to the EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ databases.
    RN   [5]
    RP   CHARACTERIZATION.
    RX   MEDLINE=91258321; PubMed=2045363;
    RA   Ilag L.L., Jahn D., Eggertsson G., Soell D.;
    RT   "The Escherichia coli hemL gene encodes glutamate 1-semialdehyde
    RT   aminotransferase.";
    RL   J. Bacteriol. 173:3408-3413(1991).
    RN   [6]
    RP   MUTAGENESIS OF LYS-265.
    RX   MEDLINE=92353044; PubMed=1643048;
    RA   Ilag L.L., Jahn D.;
    RT   "Activity and spectroscopic properties of the Escherichia coli
    RT   glutamate 1-semialdehyde aminotransferase and the putative active
    RT   site mutant K265R.";
    RL   Biochemistry 31:7143-7151(1992).
    CC   -!- CATALYTIC ACTIVITY: (S)-4-amino-5-oxopentanoate =
    CC       5-aminolevulinate.
    CC   -!- COFACTOR: PYRIDOXAL PHOSPHATE.
    CC   -!- PATHWAY: Porphyrin biosynthesis by the C5 pathway; second step.
    CC   -!- SUBUNIT: HOMODIMER.
    CC   -!- SUBCELLULAR LOCATION: CYTOPLASMIC (POTENTIAL).
    CC   -!- SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO CLASS-III OF PYRIDOXAL-PHOSPHATE-DEPENDENT
    CC       AMINOTRANSFERASES.
    DR   EMBL; X53696; CAA37734.1; -.
    DR   EMBL; D26562; CAB20274.1; -.
    DR   EMBL; AE000125; AAC73265.1; -.
    DR   EMBL; U70214; AAB08584.1; -.
    DR   PIR; S13327; S13327.
    DR   PIR; S45223; S45223.
    DR   HSSP; P24630; 2GSA.
    DR   EcoGene; EG10432; hemL.
    DR   InterPro; IPR000954; Aminotran_3.
    DR   Pfam; PF00202; aminotran_3; 1.
    DR   PROSITE; PS00600; AA_TRANSFER_CLASS_3; 1.
    KW   Porphyrin biosynthesis; Isomerase; Pyridoxal phosphate;
    KW   Complete proteome.
    FT   BINDING     265    265       PYRIDOXAL PHOSPHATE (PROBABLE).
    FT   MUTAGEN     265    265       K->R: 2% OF WILD-TYPE ACTIVITY.
    FT   CONFLICT      2      2       S -> R (IN REF. 1 AND 2).
    FT   CONFLICT      9      9       S -> Q (IN REF. 1 AND 2).
    SQ   SEQUENCE   426 AA;  45366 MW;  BED817E100468CF2 CRC64;
         MSKSENLYSA ARELIPGGVN SPVRAFTGVG GTPLFIEKAD GAYLYDVDGK AYIDYVGSWG
         PMVLGHNHPA IRNAVIEAAE RGLSFGAPTE MEVKMAQLVT ELVPTMDMVR MVNSGTEATM
         SAIRLARGFT GRDKIIKFEG CYHGHADCLL VKAGSGALTL GQPNSPGVPA DFAKYTLTCT
         YNDLASVRAA FEQYPQEIAC IIVEPVAGNM NCVPPLPEFL PGLRALCDEF GALLIIDEVM
         TGFRVALAGA QDYYGVVPDL TCLGKIIGGG MPVGAFGGRR DVMDALAPTG PVYQAGTLSG
         NPIAMAAGFA CLNEVAQPGV HETLDELTTR LAEGLLEAAE EAGIPLVVNH VGGMFGIFFT
         DAESVTCYQD VMACDVERFK RFFHMMLDEG VYLAPSAFEA GFMSVAHSME DINNTIDAAR
         RVFAKL
    //


                       4   Status of the documentation files

    SWISS-PROT is distributed with a large number of documentation files. Some
    of these files have been available for a long time (the user manual,
    release notes, the various indices for authors, citations, keywords, etc.),
    but many have been created recently and we are continuously adding new
    files, and updating and modifying existing files. Please note that the
    header in many documentaiton files changed. The following table lists all
    the documents that are currently available.

    See also section 7.3 for information on how to access updated versions of
    all documents in-between major releases.

     USERMAN.TXT    User manual
     RELNOTES.TXT   Release notes for the current release (40)
     SHORTDES.TXT   Short description of entries in SWISS-PROT [see 1]

     JOURLIST.TXT   List of cited journals
     KEYWLIST.TXT   List of keywords
     PLASMID.TXT    List of plasmids [see 2]
     SPECLIST.TXT   List of organism (species) identification codes
     TISSLIST.TXT   List of tissues
     EXPERTS.TXT    List of on-line experts for PROSITE and SWISS-PROT
     DBXREF.TXT     List of databases cross-referenced in SWISS-PROT [see 2]
     SUBMIT.TXT     Submission of sequence data to SWISS-PROT

     ACINDEX.TXT    Accession number index
     AUTINDEX.TXT   Authors index
     CITINDEX.TXT   Citation index
     KEYINDEX.TXT   Keywords index
     SPEINDEX.TXT   Species index
     DELETEAC.TXT   Deleted accession number index

     7TMRLIST.TXT   List of 7-transmembrane G-linked receptor entries [see 1]
     AATRNASY.TXT   List of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
     ALLERGEN.TXT   Nomenclature and index of allergen sequences
     ANNBIOCH.TXT   SWISS-PROT annotation: how is biochemical information
                    assigned to sequence entries
     BLOODGRP.TXT   Blood group antigen proteins
     CALBICAN.TXT   Index of Candida albicans entries and their corresponding
                    gene designations
     CDLIST.TXT     CD nomenclature for surface proteins of human leucocytes
                    Index of Caenorhabditis elegans entries and their
     CELEGANS.TXT   corresponding gene designations and WormPep
                    cross-references
                    Index of Dictyostelium discoideum entries and their
     DICTY.TXT      corresponding gene designations and DictyDB
                    cross-references
     EC2DTOSP.TXT   Index of Escherichia coli Gene-protein database
                    (ECO2DBASE) entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     ECOLI.TXT      Index of Escherichia coli strain K12 chromosomal entries
                    and their corresponding EcoGene cross-references
     EMBLTOSP.TXT   Index of EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database entries
                    referenced in SWISS-PROT
     EXTRADOM.TXT   Nomenclature of extracellular domains
     FLY.TXT        Index of Drosophila entries and their corresponding
                    FlyBase cross-references
     GLYCOSID.TXT   Classification of glycosyl hydrolase families and index of
                    glycosyl hydrolase entries in SWISS-PROT
     HAEINFLU.TXT   Index of Haemophilus influenzae strain Rd chromosomal
                    entries
     HOXLIST.TXT    Vertebrate homeotic Hox proteins: nomenclature and index
     HPYLORI.TXT    Index of Helicobacter pylori strain 26695 chromosomal
                    entries
     HUMCHR01.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 1 [see 2]
     HUMCHR02.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 2 [see 2]
     HUMCHR03.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 3 [see 2]
     HUMCHR04.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 4 [see 2]
     HUMCHR05.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 5 [see 2]
     HUMCHR06.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 6 [see 2]
     HUMCHR07.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 7 [see 2]
     HUMCHR08.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 8 [see 2]
     HUMCHR09.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 9 [see 2]
     HUMCHR10.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 10 [see 2]
     HUMCHR11.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 11 [see 2]
     HUMCHR12.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 12 [see 2]
     HUMCHR13.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 13
     HUMCHR14.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 14 [see 2]
     HUMCHR15.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 15 [see 2]
     HUMCHR16.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 16
     HUMCHR17.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 17
     HUMCHR18.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 18
     HUMCHR19.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 19
     HUMCHR20.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 20
     HUMCHR21.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 21
     HUMCHR22.TXT   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 22
     HUMCHRX.TXT    Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome X
     HUMCHRY.TXT    Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome Y
     HUMPVAR.TXT    Index of human proteins with sequence variants
     INITFACT.TXT   List and index of translation initiation factors
     INTEIN.TXT     Index of intein-containing entries referenced in
                    SWISS-PROT [see 2]
     METALLO.TXT    Classification of metallothioneins and index of the
                    entries in SWISS-PROT
     MGDTOSP.TXT    Index of MGD entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     MGENITAL.TXT   Index of Mycoplasma genitalium strain G-37 chromosomal
                    entries
     MIMTOSP.TXT    Index of MIM entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     MJANNASC.TXT   Index of Methanococcus jannaschii entries
     NGR234.TXT     Table of predicted proteins in Rhizobium plasmid pNGR234a
     NOMLIST.TXT    List of nomenclature related references for proteins
     PCC6803.TXT    Index of Synechocystis strain PCC 6803 entries
     PDBTOSP.TXT    Index of Protein Data Bank (PDB) entries referenced in
                    SWISS-PROT
     PEPTIDAS.TXT   Classification of peptidase families and index of
                    peptidase entries in SWISS-PROT
     PLASTID.TXT    List of chloroplast and cyanelle encoded proteins
     POMBE.TXT      Index of Schizosaccharomyces pombe entries and their
                    corresponding gene designations
     RESTRIC.TXT    List of restriction enzyme and methylase entries
     RIBOSOMP.TXT   Index of ribosomal proteins classified by families on the
                    basis of sequence similarities
     RPROWAZE.TXT   Index of Rickettsia prowazekii strain Madrid E entries
                    [see 2]
     SALTY.TXT      Index of Salmonella typhimurium strain LT2 chromosomal
                    entries and their corresponding StyGene cross-references
     SUBTILIS.TXT   Index of Bacillus subtilis strain 168 chromosomal entries
                    and their corresponding SubtiList cross-references
     UPFLIST.TXT    UPF (Uncharacterized Protein Families) list and index of
                    members
     YEAST.TXT      Index of Saccharomyces cerevisiae entries in SWISS-PROT
                    and their corresponding gene designations
     YEAST1.TXT     Yeast Chromosome I entries
     YEAST2.TXT     Yeast Chromosome II entries
     YEAST3.TXT     Yeast Chromosome III entries
     YEAST5.TXT     Yeast Chromosome V entries
     YEAST6.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VI entries
     YEAST7.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VII entries
     YEAST8.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VIII entries
     YEAST9.TXT     Yeast Chromosome IX entries
     YEAST10.TXT    Yeast Chromosome X entries
     YEAST11.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XI entries
     YEAST13.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XIII entries
     YEAST14.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XIV entries

    Notes:

     1   The '7TMRLIST.TXT' and 'SHORTDES.TXT' files have been converted to
         mixed-case characters.
     2   The 'DBXREF.TXT', 'HUMCHR01.TXT', 'HUMCHR02.TXT', 'HUMCHR03.TXT',
         'HUMCHR04.TXT', 'HUMCHR05.TXT', 'HUMCHR06.TXT', 'HUMCHR07.TXT',
         'HUMCHR08.TXT', 'HUMCHR09.TXT', 'HUMCHR10.TXT', 'HUMCHR11.TXT',
         'HUMCHR12.TXT', 'HUMCHR14.TXT', 'HUMCHR15.TXT', 'INTEIN.TXT',
         'PLASMID.TXT', and 'RPROWAZE.TXT' files are new documents introduced
         since release 38.

    We have continued to include in some SWISS-PROT documentation files the
    references of Web sites relevant to the subject under consideration. There
    are now 89 documents that include such links.


                       5   The ExPASy World-Wide Web server

         5.1   Background information

    The most efficient and user-friendly way to browse interactively in
    SWISS-PROT, PROSITE, ENZYME, SWISS-2DPAGE and other databases is to use the
    World-Wide Web (WWW) molecular biology server ExPASy. The ExPASy server was
    made available to the public in September 1993 and is reachable at the
    following address:

         http://www.expasy.org/

    The ExPASy WWW server allows access, using the user-friendly hypertext
    model, to the SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL, PROSITE, ENZYME, SWISS-2DPAGE,
    SWISS-3DIMAGE and CD40Lbase databases. And, through any SWISS-PROT protein
    sequence entry, to other databases such as EMBL, Eco2DBASE, EcoCyc,
    EcoGene, FlyBase, GCRDb, GlycoSuiteDB, MaizeDB, OMIM, PDB, HSSP, Pfam,
    ProDom, REBASE, SGD, SubtiList, TRANSFAC, YPD, ZFIN and Medline. ExPASy
    also offers many tools for the analysis of protein sequences and 2D gels.

    There are currently five mirror sites of ExPASy, i.e. exact copies of the
    server. The ExPASy mirror sites are located in:

     Australia http://au.expasy.org/
               at the Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF), Sydney
     Canada    http://ca.expasy.org/
               at the Canadian Bioinformatics Resource (CBR), Halifax
     China     http://cn.expasy.org/
               at the Center of Bioinformatics, Peking University, Beijing
     Korea     http://kr.expasy.org/
               at the Yonsei Proteome Research Center
     Taiwan    http://tw.expasy.org/
               at the National Health Research Institutes (NHRI), Taipei

    Explicit general and continuously updated documentation about the ExPASy
    server is available at http://www.expasy.org/doc/expasy.pdf.

         5.2   Swiss-Shop

    We provide, on ExPASy, a service called Swiss-Shop
    (http://www.expasy.org/swiss-shop/). Swiss-Shop is an automated sequence
    alerting system which allows users to obtain, by email, new sequence
    entries relevant to their field(s) of interest. Every week, the new
    sequences entered in SWISS-PROT are automatically compared with all the
    criteria that have been defined by the users. If a sequence corresponds to
    the selection criteria defined by a user, that sequence is sent by
    electronic mail. Various criteria can be combined:

       * By entering one or more words that should be present in the
         description line;
       * By entering one or more species name(s) or taxonomic division(s);
       * By entering one or more keywords;
       * By entering one or more author names;
       * By entering the accession number (or entry name) of a PROSITE pattern
         or a user-defined sequence pattern. In this case, all new SWISS-PROT
         entries matching this pattern will be reported;
       * By entering the accession number (or entry name) of an existing
         SWISS-PROT entry or by entering a 'private' sequence. In this case,
         all new SWISS-PROT entries similar to that sequence will be reported.

         5.3   What is new on ExPASy

    ExPASy is constantly modified and improved. If you wish to be informed on
    the changes made to the server you can either:

       * Read the document 'History of changes, improvements and new features'
         which is available at the address: http://www.expasy.org/history.html
       * Subscribe to Swiss-Flash, a service that reports news of databases,
         software and service developments. By subscribing to this service, you
         will automatically get Swiss-Flash bulletins by electronic mail. To
         subscribe, use the address: http://www.expasy.org/swiss-flash/

    Among all the improvements and the new features introduced since the last
    SWISS-PROT release, here are those that we believe are specifically useful
    to SWISS-PROT users:

         1. A new and improved version of the NiceProt view of SWISS-PROT is
         available and offers the following new features: a link to a
         printer-friendly view of a SWISS-PROT entry, display of the length of
         certain features in the FT lines, and access to a new tool, the
         'Feature aligner' which allows to select features for submission to
         the ClustalW multiple alignment program.

         2. SWISS-PROT release statistics are now available for every update of
         the database (http://www.expasy.org/sprot/relnotes/relstat.html).
         Among other parameters, statistics about database growth, average
         sequence lengths and amino acid composition, taxonomic origin, journal
         citations and database cross-references are presented, including some
         graphics.

         3. A new view is available within the SRS Sequence Retrieval System.
         It displays, for each protein corresponding to a user query, gene
         name(s) and organism (in addition to the parameters ID, AC,
         description and sequence length which are displayed by the default
         view "Short description"). This new view is entitled "Long
         description" and is available from the menu "Use view ..." in the SRS
         query form.

         4. The SIB Blast interface (accessible also via "Quick BLAST" or from
         the bottom of every SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL entry) now offers the
         possibility to restrict the similarity search by using taxonomic
         criteria. A "Taxonomic View" of the results can also be obtained via
         the BLAST result page. The user can also select a number of matching
         sequences and directly submit them to a ClustalW search, or retrieve
         and download the corresponding SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL entries. An
         alternative view of the results, NiceBlast, is available, which
         consists of an html table, detailing complete descriptions of all
         matching proteins, including the full protein name, gene name,
         sequence length and organism.

         5. Explicit cross-references have been implemented between SWISS-PROT
         and BLOCKS, GlycoSuiteDB, InterPro, Leproma, MEROPS, MypuList, SMART,
         TubercuList, ANU-2DPAGE, PHCI-2DPAGE, PMMA-2DPAGE, COMPLUYEAST-2DPAGE,
         and Siena-2DPAGE. Implicit links have been added to the resources DIP,
         GeneCensus, GeneLynx, HUGE and NucleaRDB.

         6. A new tool has been added to the ExPASy suite of proteomics tools:
         FindPept (http://www.expasy.org/tools/findpept.html) can identify
         peptides that result from unspecific cleavage of proteins from their
         experimental masses, taking into account artefactual chemical
         modifications, post-translational modifications (PTM) and protease
         autolytic cleavage. This new tool has been closely integrated with the
         other proteomics tools on ExPASy, such as PeptIdent and FindMod.

         7. The Sulfinator (http://www.expasy.org/tools/sulfinator/) is a newly
         developed tool to predict tyrosine sulfation sites for a protein
         sequence, using four different Hidden Markov Models (HMM).

         8. Sequences of alternatively spliced isoforms of the same protein are
         documented in the feature table of that protein sequence record. In
         collaboration with the SWISS-PROT group at EBI, a program varsplic.pl
         has been written to generate additional records from SWISS-PROT and
         TrEMBL, one for each splice isoform of each protein. The resulting
         data sets for SWISS- PROT and TrEMBL are available on the ExPASy ftp
         server (ftp://ftp.expasy.org/databases/sp_tr_nrdb/), along with a more
         detailed description of the project and information on how to obtain a
         local copy of the varsplic.pl program.

         The additional isoform entries have been added to the
         SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL databases underlying the BLAST server at SIB
         Switzerland, ScanProsite, and PeptIdent. Gradually, all other tools on
         ExPASy will be modified to handle splice isoforms. The NiceProt view
         of SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL provides links from the isoform name in the
         feature table (example: Q01432) to a page displaying the sequence of
         the corresponding isoform.

         9. In the framework of the HAMAP project (see section 2.3), several
         new features and tools have been implemented on ExPASy:
            o The keyword "Complete Proteome" has been introduced to all
              SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL entries describing a protein which is thought
              to be expressed by an organism whose genome has been completely
              sequenced. This keyword is so far only used for microbial
              (bacterial and archaeal) proteins. A complete set of proteins
              from a microbial genome can therefore be obtained using this
              keyword across SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL.
            o We provide clean non-redundant SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL data sets for
              all completely sequenced microbial genomes. These files are
              available on the ExPASy ftp server in SWISS-PROT and Fasta format
              (ftp://ftp.expasy.org/databases/complete_proteomes/), and can
              also be used for similarity searches on the SIB Blast server
              ("microbial proteomes").
            o A Genomic Proximity Viewer is available for those microbial
              genomes where an ORF numbering system exists. For those
              organisms, it is possible to click on the ORF name in the
              SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL GN lines to obtain a list of proteins encoded
              by genes in proximity. The tool is also accessible from the HAMAP
              complete proteome pages of those organisms. Example: Borrelia
              Burgdorferi,
              http://www.expasy.org/cgi-bin/genomeview.pl?bn=BORBU.

         10. A year ago we have launched Protein Spotlight
         (http://www.expasy.org/spotlight/); a periodical review centered on a
         specific protein or group of proteins. It is published on a monthly
         basis. You can subscribe to receive each issue, free of charge, in
         HTML or PDF format.


                       6 TrEMBL - a supplement to SWISS-PROT

    The ongoing genome sequencing and mapping projects have dramatically
    increased the number of protein sequences to be incorporated into
    SWISS-PROT. Since we do not want to dilute the quality standards of
    SWISS-PROT by incorporating sequences into the database without proper
    sequence analysis and annotation, we cannot speed up the incorporation of
    new incoming data indefinitely. But as we also want to make the sequences
    available as fast as possible, we have introduced with SWISS-PROT a
    computer annotated supplement. This supplement consists of entries in
    SWISS-PROT-like format derived from the translation of all coding sequences
    (CDS) in the EMBL nucleotide sequence database, except those already
    included in SWISS-PROT.

    This supplement is named TrEMBL (Translation from EMBL). It can be
    considered as a preliminary section of SWISS-PROT. This SWISS-PROT release
    is supplemented by TrEMBL release 18.

    TrEMBL is available by FTP from the EBI and ExPASy servers in the directory
    'databases/trembl'. It can be queried on WWW by the EBI and ExPASy SRS
    servers. It is distributed with its own set of release notes.


                      7   FTP access to SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL

         7.1   Generalities

    SWISS-PROT is available for download on the following anonymous FTP
    servers:

     Organization Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)
     Address      ftp.expasy.org, au.expasy.org/ftp/,
                  ca.expasy.org/ftp/, cn.expasy.org/ftp/,
                  kr.expasy.org/ftp/, tw.expasy.org/ftp/
     Directory    /databases/swiss-prot/


     Organization European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
     Address      ftp.ebi.ac.uk
     Directory    /pub/databases/swissprot/


         7.2   Non-redundant database

    We distribute on the ExPASy and EBI FTP servers, files that make up a
    non-redundant (see further) and complete protein sequence database
    consisting of three components:

    1) SWISS-PROT
    2) TrEMBL
    3) New entries to be later integrated into TrEMBL (hereafter known as
    TrEMBL_New)

    Every week three files are completely rebuilt. These files are named:
    sprot. dat.gz, trembl.dat.gz and trembl_new.dat.gz. As indicated by their
    '. gz' extension, these are gzip-compressed files which, when decompressed,
    will produce ASCII files in SWISS-PROT format.

    Three other files are also available (sprot.fas.gz, trembl.fas.gz and
    trembl_new.fas.gz) which are compressed 'fasta' format sequence files
    useful for building the databases used by FASTA, BLAST and other sequence
    similarity search programs. Please do not use these files for any other
    purpose, as you will lose all annotations by using this very ' primitive'
    format.

    The files for the non-redundant database are stored in the directory
    '/databases/sp_tr_nrdb' on the ExPASy FTP server (ftp.expasy.org) and in
    the directory '/pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb' on the EBI FTP server
    (ftp.ebi.ac.uk).

    Additional notes:

       * The SWISS-PROT file continuously grows as new annotated sequences are
         added.

       * The TrEMBL file decreases in size as sequences are moved out of that
         section after being annotated and moved into SWISS-PROT. Four times a
         year a new release of TrEMBL is built at EBI, at this point the TrEMBL
         file increases in size as it then includes all of the new data (see
         next section) that has accumulated since the last release.

       * The TrEMBL_New file starts as a very small file and grows in size
         until a new release of TrEMBL is available.

       * SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL share the same system of accession numbers.
         Therefore you will not find any primary accession number duplicated
         between the two sections. A TrEMBL entry (and its associated accession
         number(s)) can either move to SWISS-PROT as new entry or be merged
         with an existing SWISS-PROT entry. In the latter case, the accession
         number(s) of that TrEMBL entry are added to that of the SWISS-PROT
         entry.

       * TrEMBL_New does not have real accession numbers. However it was
         necessary to have an 'AC' line so as to be able to use it with
         different software products. This AC line contains a temporary
         identifier which consists of the protein_ID (protein sequence
         identifier) of the coding sequence in the parent nucleotide sequence.

       * TrEMBL_New is quite messy! You will of course find new sequence
         entries but you will also encounter sequences that are going to be
         used to update existing TrEMBL or SWISS-PROT entries. None of the
         "cleaning" steps that are applied to produce a TrEMBL release are run
         on TrEMBL_New nor are any of the computer-annotation software tools
         that are used to enhance the information content of TrEMBL. TrEMBL_New
         is provided only so that users can be sure not to miss any important
         new sequences when they run similarity searches.

       * While these three files allow you to build what we call a
         'non-redundant' database, it must be noted that this is not completely
         a true statement. Without going into a long explanation we can say
         that this is currently the best attempt in providing a complete
         selection of protein sequence entries while trying to eliminate
         redundancies. Also SWISS-PROT is completely (well 99.994% !)
         non-redundant, TrEMBL is far from being non-redundant and the addition
         of SWISS-PROT + TrEMBL is even less.

       * To describe to your users the version of the non-redundant database
         that you are providing them with, you should use a statement of the
         form:

              SWISS-PROT release 40.0 of 17-Oct-2001;
              TrEMBL release 18.0 of 22-Oct-2001;
              TrEMBL_New of 22-Oct-2001.

         7.3   Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT documents

    Whilst the ExPASy FTP server so far only allowed FTP access to the
    SWISS-PROT documents and indexes in their versions at the time of the last
    full release, all documents are now updated with every weekly release of
    SWISS-PROT. They are available for FTP download from the directory
    /databases/swiss-prot/updated_doc/.

         7.4   Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT

    Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT are available by anonymous FTP. Three files
    are generated at each update:

     new_seq.dat Contains all the new entries since the last full
                 release;

     upd_seq.dat Contains the entries for which the sequence data has
                 been updated since the last release;

     upd_ann.dat Contains the entries for which one or more annotation
                 fields have been updated since the last release.

    Important notes

       * Although we try to follow a regular schedule, we do not promise to
         update these files every week. In most cases two weeks may elapse
         between two updates.
       * Instead of using the above files, you can, every week, download an
         updated copy of the SWISS-PROT database. This file is available in the
         directory containing the non-redundant database (see section 7.2).


                              8   ENZYME and PROSITE

         8.1   The ENZYME nomenclature database

    Release 27.0 of the ENZYME nomenclature database is distributed with
    release 40 of SWISS-PROT. ENZYME release 27.0 contains information relative
    to 3'870 enzymes. In this release, we have added a significant number of
    new entries and we also updated many entries.

         8.2   The PROSITE database

    Release 17.0 of the PROSITE database will be available in a few weeks.
    PROSITE will now come with its own set of release notes.

                              9   We need your help!

    We welcome feedback from our users. We would especially appreciate that you
    notify us if you find that sequences belonging to your field of expertise
    are missing from the database. We also would like to be notified about
    annotations to be updated, if, for example, the function of a protein has
    been clarified or if new information about post-translational modifications
    has become available. To facilitate this feedback we offer, on the ExPASy
    WWW server, a form that allows the submission of updates and/or corrections
    to SWISS-PROT:

         http://www.expasy.org/sprot/sp_update_form.html

    It is also possible, from any entry in SWISS-PROT displayed by the ExPASy
    server, to submit updates and/or corrections for that particular entry.
    Finally, you can also send your comments by electronic mail to the address:

         swiss-prot@expasy.org

    Note that all update requests are assigned a unique identifier of the
    form UR-Xnnnn (example: UR-A0123). This identifier is used internally by
    the SWISS-PROT staff at SIB and EBI to track down the fate of requests
    and is also be used in email exchanges with the persons having submitted
    a request.


                           APPENDIX A:   Some statistics

         A.1   Amino acid composition

         A.1.1   Composition in percent for the complete database

       Ala (A) 7.61   Gln (Q) 3.93   Leu (L) 9.53   Ser (S) 7.08
       Arg (R) 5.19   Glu (E) 6.47   Lys (K) 5.97   Thr (T) 5.58
       Asn (N) 4.36   Gly (G) 6.85   Met (M) 2.37   Trp (W) 1.21
       Asp (D) 5.25   His (H) 2.24   Phe (F) 4.10   Tyr (Y) 3.16
       Cys (C) 1.63   Ile (I) 5.85   Pro (P) 4.89   Val (V) 6.61

       Asx (B) 0.000  Glx (Z) 0.000  Xaa (X) 0.01

         A.1.2   Classification of the amino acids by their frequency

       Leu, Ala, Ser, Gly, Val, Glu, Lys, Ile, Thr, Asp, Arg, Pro, Asn, Phe,
       Gln, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp

         A.2   Taxonomic origin

    Total number of species represented in this release of SWISS-PROT: 7'188
    The first twenty species represent 45'181 sequences: 44.5 % of the total
    number of entries.

         A.2.1   Table of the frequency of occurrence of species

            Species represented 1x: 3396
                                2x: 1086
                                3x:  589
                                4x:  366
                                5x:  267
                                6x:  251
                                7x:  169
                                8x:  137
                                9x:  125
                               10x:   61
                           11- 20x:  308
                           21- 50x:  231
                           51-100x:   78
                             >100x:  124

         A.2.2   Table of the most represented species

      ------  ---------  --------------------------------------------
      Number  Frequency  Species
      ------  ---------  --------------------------------------------
           1       7471  Homo sapiens (Human)
           2       4859  Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Baker's yeast)
           3       4816  Mus musculus (Mouse)
           4       4741  Escherichia coli
           5       3091  Rattus norvegicus (Rat)
           6       2260  Bacillus subtilis
           7       2184  Caenorhabditis elegans
           8       1782  Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Fission yeast)
           9       1769  Haemophilus influenzae
          10       1514  Drosophila melanogaster (Fruit fly)
          11       1472  Methanococcus jannaschii
          12       1409  Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse-ear cress)
          13       1321  Mycobacterium tuberculosis
          14       1295  Bos taurus (Bovine)
          15       1004  Gallus gallus (Chicken)
          16        883  Synechocystis sp. (strain PCC 6803)
          17        872  Escherichia coli O157:H7
          18        846  Salmonella typhimurium
          19        798  Archaeoglobus fulgidus
          20        794  Xenopus laevis (African clawed frog)
          21        765  Sus scrofa (Pig)
          22        680  Aquifex aeolicus
          23        671  Oryctolagus cuniculus (Rabbit)
          24        662  Mycoplasma pneumoniae
          25        594  Pseudomonas aeruginosa
          26        588  Treponema pallidum
          27        557  Buchnera aphidicola (subsp. Acyrthosiphon pisum)
          28        523  Rickettsia prowazekii
          29        522  Helicobacter pylori (Campylobacter pylori)
          30        505  Helicobacter pylori J99 (Campylobacter pylori J99)
          31        503  Mycobacterium leprae
          32        486  Mycoplasma genitalium
          33        481  Zea mays (Maize)
          34        450  Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum
          35        403  Rhizobium sp. (strain NGR234)
          36        395  Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease spirochete)
          37        390  Oryza sativa (Rice)
          38        387  Chlamydia trachomatis
          39        375  Thermotoga maritima
          40        374  Streptomyces coelicolor
          41        371  Chlamydia pneumoniae (Chlamydophila pneumoniae)
          42        368  Canis familiaris (Dog)
          43        364  Chlamydia muridarum
          44        356  Rhizobium meliloti (Sinorhizobium meliloti)
          45        353  Vibrio cholerae
          46        333  Nicotiana tabacum (Common tobacco)
          47        323  Pasteurella multocida
          48        322  Ovis aries (Sheep)
          49        320  Pyrococcus horikoshii
          50        311  Dictyostelium discoideum (Slime mold)
          51        301  Lactococcus lactis (subsp. lactis) (Streptococcus lactis)
          52        284  Pyrococcus abyssi
          53        276  Pisum sativum (Garden pea)
          54        272  Bacteriophage T4
          55        260  Staphylococcus aureus
          56        256  Candida albicans (Yeast)
          57        255  Neurospora crassa
          58        254  Vaccinia virus (strain Copenhagen)
          59        247  Triticum aestivum (Wheat)
          60        247  Bacillus halodurans
          61        244  Glycine max (Soybean)
          62        243  Hordeum vulgare (Barley)
          63        242  Aeropyrum pernix
          64        241  Rhodobacter capsulatus (Rhodopseudomonas capsulata)
          65        231  Pseudomonas putida
          66        227  Lycopersicon esculentum (Tomato)
          67        221  Cavia porcellus (Guinea pig)
          68        220  Porphyra purpurea
          69        219  Solanum tuberosum (Potato)
          70        214  Spinacia oleracea (Spinach)
          71        214  Klebsiella pneumoniae
          72        213  Bacillus stearothermophilus
          73        210  Neisseria meningitidis (serogroup B)
          74        204  Neisseria meningitidis (serogroup A)
          75        193  Human cytomegalovirus (strain AD169)
          76        188  Campylobacter jejuni
          77        187  Vaccinia virus (strain WR)
          78        183  Deinococcus radiodurans
          79        180  Agrobacterium tumefaciens
          80        179  Sulfolobus solfataricus
          81        179  Brachydanio rerio (Zebrafish) (Zebra danio)
          82        173  Equus caballus (Horse)
          83        171  Mesocricetus auratus (Golden hamster)
          84        171  Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
          85        170  Thermoplasma acidophilum
          86        168  Emericella nidulans (Aspergillus nidulans)
          87        158  Halobacterium sp. (strain NRC-1)
          88        154  Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus (AcMNPV)
          89        153  Cyanidium caldarium
          90        152  Thermus aquaticus (subsp. thermophilus)
          91        151  Marchantia polymorpha (Liverwort)
          92        151  Cyanophora paradoxa
          93        149  Xylella fastidiosa
          94        148  Fowlpox virus (FPV)
          95        148  Guillardia theta (Cryptomonas phi)
          96        147  Synechococcus sp. (strain PCC 7942) (Anacystis nidulans R2)
          97        147  Variola virus
          98        143  Caulobacter crescentus
          99        142  Ureaplasma parvum (Ureaplasma urealyticum biotype 1)
         100        142  Kluyveromyces lactis (Yeast)

         A.2.3   Taxonomic distribution of the sequences

       Kingdom       Sequences (% of the database)
       Archaea            5032 (  5%)
       Bacteria          34782 ( 34%)
       Eukaryota         53357 ( 53%)
       Viruses            8431 (  8%)

         A.3   Sequence size

         A.3.1   Repartition of the sequences by size (excluding fragments)

                   From   To  Number             From   To   Number
                      1-  50    1950             1001-1100      915
                     51- 100    7099             1101-1200      708
                    101- 150   10484             1201-1300      471
                    151- 200    9010             1301-1400      318
                    201- 250    8978             1401-1500      268
                    251- 300    8130             1501-1600      172
                    301- 350    7894             1601-1700      150
                    351- 400    7945             1701-1800      105
                    401- 450    5869             1801-1900      116
                    451- 500    5485             1901-2000       87
                    501- 550    4190             2001-2100       47
                    551- 600    2852             2101-2200       87
                    601- 650    2249             2201-2300       89
                    651- 700    1651             2301-2400       50
                    701- 750    1457             2401-2500       48
                    751- 800    1240             >2500          273
                    801- 850     985
                    851- 900     965
                    901- 950     700
                    951-1000     593

         A.3.2   Longest and shortest sequences

       The shortest sequence is  GRWM_HUMAN (P24272) :     3 amino acids.
       The longest sequence is   NEBU_HUMAN (P20929) :  6669 amino acids.

         A.4   Journal citations

    Note: the following citation statistics reflect the number of distinct
    journal citations.

    Total number of journals cited in this release of SWISS-PROT: 1'190

         A.4.1   Table of the frequency of journal citations

            Journals cited 1x:  443
                           2x:  157
                           3x:   87
                           4x:   58
                           5x:   51
                           6x:   27
                           7x:   24
                           8x:   19
                           9x:   21
                          10x:   11
                      11- 20x:   83
                      21- 50x:   88
                      51-100x:   31
                        >100x:   90

         A.4.2   List of the most cited journals in SWISS-PROT

       Nb    Citations   Journal name
       --    ---------   -------------------------------------------------------------
        1         8033   Journal of Biological Chemistry
        2         4615   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A.
        3         3554   Nucleic Acids Research
        4         3295   Journal of Bacteriology
        5         3144   Gene
        6         2492   FEBS Letters
        7         2293   Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications
        8         2255   European Journal of Biochemistry
        9         2144   Biochemistry
       10         1998   The EMBO Journal
       11         1894   Nature
       12         1833   Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
       13         1682   Journal of Molecular Biology
       14         1503   Genomics
       15         1477   Cell
       16         1434   Molecular and Cellular Biology
       17         1096   Biochemical Journal
       18         1085   Molecular and General Genetics
       19         1078   Plant Molecular Biology
       20         1024   Science
       21          982   Molecular Microbiology
       22          814   Virology
       23          808   Journal of Biochemistry
       24          637   Human Molecular Genetics
       25          592   Journal of Cell Biology
       26          573   Journal of Virology
       27          525   Human Mutation
       28          520   Plant Physiology
       29          518   Genes and Development
       30          510   Yeast
       31          505   Nature Genetics
       32          494   Oncogene
       33          486   Journal of General Virology
       34          477   Infection and Immunity
       35          461   Journal of Immunology
       36          441   The American Journal of Human Genetics
       37          424   Structure
       38          420   Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics
       39          391   FEMS Microbiology Letters
       40          366   Microbiology
       41          358   Current Genetics
       42          346   Development
       43          333   Nature Structural Biology
       44          331   Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology
       45          320   Human Genetics
       46          293   Genetics
       47          280   Molecular Endocrinology
       48          277   Journal of Clinical Investigation
       49          270   Biological Chemistry Hoppe-Seyler
       50          267   Applied and Environmental Microbiology
       51          265   Blood
       52          263   Journal of Molecular Evolution
       53          253   Protein Science
       54          249   DNA and Cell Biology
       55          243   Developmental Biology
       56          229   Journal of General Microbiology
       57          224   Journal of Experimental Medicine
       58          213   Neuron
       59          213   Hoppe-Seyler's Zeitschrift fur Physiologische Chemie
       60          211   Cancer Research
       61          210   Immunogenetics
       62          208   Mammalian Genome
       63          197   Endocrinology
       64          182   Mechanisms of Development
       65          180   DNA Sequence
       66          170   Acta Crystallographica, Section D
       67          164   The Plant Cell
       68          161   Brain Research. Molecular Brain Research
       69          159   Journal of Neurochemistry
       70          158   Molecular Biology and Evolution
       71          156   DNA
       72          155   Molecular Biology of the Cell
       73          147   The Plant Journal
       74          146   Journal of Cell Science
       75          145   Journal of Neuroscience
       76          135   Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology
       77          133   Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry
       78          130   Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy
       79          125   Biochimie
       80          123   Virus Research
       81          122   Bioorganicheskaia Khimiia
       82          120   Molecular Pharmacology
       83          117   Hemoglobin
       84          116   The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism
       85          113   Agricultural and Biological Chemistry
       86          112   Cytogenetics and Cell Genetics
       87          112   American Journal of Physiology
       88          110   Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions
       89          105   Proteins
       90          102   Peptides
       91          100   DNA Research

         A.5   Statistics for some line types

    The following table summarizes the total number of some SWISS-PROT lines,
    as well as the number of entries with at least one such line, and the
    frequency of the lines.

                                       Total    Number of  Average
    Line type / subtype                number   entries    per entry
    ---------------------------------  -------- ---------  ---------

    References (RL)                     182326              1.79
       Journal                          152419     89829    1.50
       Submitted to EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ    27607     24142    0.27
       Unpublished observations            500       496   <0.01
       Book citation                       438       428   <0.01
       Submitted to SWISS-PROT             437       435   <0.01
       Plant Gene Register                 385       378   <0.01
       Submitted to other databases        185       183   <0.01
       Thesis                              160       159   <0.01
       Unpublished results                 114       112   <0.01
       Patent                               79        77   <0.01
       Worm Breeder's Gazette                2         2   <0.01

    Comments (CC)                       309232              3.04
       SIMILARITY                        91246     81758    0.90
       FUNCTION                          61984     61049    0.61
       SUBCELLULAR LOCATION              42010     42010    0.41
       CATALYTIC ACTIVITY                27896     26508    0.27
       SUBUNIT                           25865     25864    0.25
       PATHWAY                           11464     11431    0.11
       TISSUE SPECIFICITY                10070     10070    0.10
       COFACTOR                           7811      7811    0.08
       MISCELLANEOUS                      6942      6352    0.07
       PTM                                5829      5447    0.06
       INDUCTION                          2971      2971    0.03
       DEVELOPMENTAL STAGE                2811      2811    0.03
       ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS               2755      2754    0.03
       DOMAIN                             2658      2471    0.03
       CAUTION                            2169      2099    0.02
       DISEASE                            1865      1620    0.02
       ENZYME REGULATION                  1473      1473    0.01
       MASS SPECTROMETRY                   548       506    0.01
       DATABASE                            503       465   <0.01
       POLYMORPHISM                        295       287   <0.01
       PHARMACEUTICAL                       38        38   <0.01
       BIOTECHNOLOGY                        29        29   <0.01

    Features (FT)                       471213              4.64
       DOMAIN                            76115     22381    0.75
       TRANSMEM                          64913     14473    0.64
       CARBOHYD                          40298      9840    0.40
       CONFLICT                          36638     12924    0.36
       DISULFID                          34856      9355    0.34
       METAL                             27931      6801    0.27
       CHAIN                             20956     16975    0.21
       VARIANT                           18980      3544    0.19
       ACT_SITE                          18495     11839    0.18
       REPEAT                            17543      3013    0.17
       SIGNAL                            12976     12975    0.13
       NP_BIND                           12514      8916    0.12
       MOD_RES                           11665      6503    0.11
       NON_TER                           10234      7849    0.10
       BINDING                            7710      6160    0.08
       TURN                               7330       633    0.07
       STRAND                             7077       562    0.07
       ZN_FING                            5911      2061    0.06
       INIT_MET                           4892      4868    0.05
       HELIX                              4644       587    0.05
       VARSPLIC                           4211      2068    0.04
       SITE                               4151      3019    0.04
       PROPEP                             3842      3488    0.04
       DNA_BIND                           3796      3589    0.04
       MUTAGEN                            2797       963    0.03
       LIPID                              2684      2174    0.03
       TRANSIT                            2300      2284    0.02
       PEPTIDE                            2202       830    0.02
       CA_BIND                            2106       840    0.02
       NON_CONS                            732       387    0.01
       UNSURE                              255       117   <0.01
       SIMILAR                             242       203   <0.01
       SE_CYS                              104        64   <0.01
       THIOETH                              90        31   <0.01
       THIOLEST                             23        23   <0.01

    Cross-references (DR)               718458              7.07
       EMBL                             179318     95610    1.76
       InterPro                         128566     81051    1.27
       Pfam                             101086     77741    0.99
       PROSITE                           83189     53484    0.82
       PIR                               47057     35789    0.46
       HSSP                              33548     33548    0.33
       PRINTS                            30494     27899    0.30
       SMART                             30434     22855    0.30
       ProDom                            16772     16337    0.17
       PDB                               10380      3124    0.10
       TIGR                               9378      9343    0.09
       MIM                                6755      6024    0.07
       SGD                                4903      4849    0.05
       MGD                                4408      4397    0.04
       EcoGene                            4134      4132    0.04
       Mendel                             3041      2942    0.03
       MEROPS                             2348      2260    0.02
       SubtiList                          2234      2233    0.02
       WormPep                            2071      2034    0.02
       FlyBase                            1936      1883    0.02
       GCRDb                              1661       972    0.02
       TRANSFAC                           1612      1494    0.02
       TubercuList                        1350      1313    0.01
       StyGene                             799       798    0.01
       SWISS-2DPAGE                        746       745    0.01
       Leproma                             501       497   <0.01
       MaizeDB                             402       398   <0.01
       HIV                                 370       354   <0.01
       REBASE                              352       347   <0.01
       ECO2DBASE                           351       299   <0.01
       DictyDb                             313       310   <0.01
       GlycoSuiteDB                        249       249   <0.01
       ZFIN                                154       154   <0.01
       YEPD                                129       120   <0.01
       Aarhus/Ghent-2DPAGE                 128        98   <0.01
       PHCI-2DPAGE                         128       128   <0.01
       Siena-2DPAGE                        104       104   <0.01
       HSC-2DPAGE                           85        85   <0.01
       COMPLUYEAST-2DPAGE                   50        50   <0.01
       CarbBank                             41        21   <0.01
       Maize-2DPAGE                         39        39   <0.01
       PMMA-2DPAGE                          26        26   <0.01
       MypuList                             21        21   <0.01
       ANU-2DPAGE                           13        13   <0.01

         A.6   Miscellaneous statistics

    Total number of distinct authors cited in SWISS-PROT: 146'936

    Total number of entries encoded on a chloroplast : 2'609
    Total number of entries encoded on a mitochondrion : 2'262
    Total number of entries encoded on a cyanelle : 145
    Total number of entries encoded on a plasmid : 2'344

    Number of additional sequences encoded on splice variants : 3'505

    --End of document--
      
