---
title: Swiss-Prot release 5.0
categories: sp-major
---

                 SWISS-PROT RELEASE 5.0 RELEASE NOTES


       Date:     September 8, 1987
       Author:   A. Bairoch


                              INTRODUCTION

       Release 5.0  of SWISS-PROT  contains 5205 sequence entries,
       comprising  1'327'683  amino  acids  abstracted  from  5673
       references. This represents an increase of 28% over release
       4.0. The  recent growth  of the  data  bank  is  summarized
       below:

       Release      Date         Number of entries           Nb of amino
                                                             acids

       3.0          11/86        4160                            969 641
       4.0          04/87        4387                          1 036 010
       5.0          09/87        5205                          1 327 683


                             SOURCE OF DATA

       Release 5.0  has been  updated using  protein sequence data
       from release  12.0 of the PIR protein data bank, as well as
       translation of nucleic-acid sequence data from release 12.0
       of the EMBL nucleotide Data Library. The statistics for the
       source of the sequences in release 5.0 of SWISS-PROT are:

       Entries adapted from PIR entries                   4419
       Entries translated from EMBL entries                708
       Entries entered "in house"                           78


       DESCRIPTION OF THE CHANGES MADE TO SWISS-PROT SINCE RELEASE 4


       New sequence data

       To make  SWISS-PROT as complete as possible we have scanned
       the EMBL  Data Library  for sequences  not yet available in
       the protein  data bank and we have translated and annotated
       some 700 additional sequences.

       In addition  to those  new  sequences,  some  200  existing
       entries have  been updated  with sequence  data  translated
       from EMBL entries.


       We also  have started to introduce DR lines pointing to the
       primary accession  number of  the nucleotide sequence entry
       in EMBL  to entries  which were sequenced at the DNA or RNA
       level.  The   current  statistics  for  DR  lines  are  the
       following:

       Entries with pointer line(s) to a PIR entry        4419
       Entries with pointer line(s) to an EMBL entry      1512
       Entries with pointer line(s) to a PDB entry         140


       Modifications in the feature keys

       -  A new feature key has been introduced with this release:
          MUTAGEN which  is used to describe sites which have been
          experimentally altered.

       -  The description  part of  the CONFLICT  and VARIANT keys
          now follows a precise format.

          a) If  the position described is missing the description
             part will be similar to those shown in  the following
             examples:

          FT   CONFLICT     33     33       MISSING (IN REF. 2).
          FT   VARIANT      12    245       MISSING (IN SMALL VARIANT).

          b) Positions with amino acid change(s) are now described
             as shown in the following examples:

          FT   CONFLICT     60     60       P -> A (IN REF. 2).
          FT   CONFLICT      1      5       ASTQS -> GAWTL (IN REF. 3).
          FT   VARIANT      39     39       P -> G (IN 50% OF THE MOLECULES).


       Format modifications

       We have  made a number of small modifications to the format
       of SWISS-PROT  to make  it more compatible with that of the
       EMBL Data Library. Those format changes are the following:

       -  Journal abbreviations  are now  identical in  both  data
          banks.
       -  The format  of the  RL line  for submitted  data and for
          Ph.D. thesis  has been  modified to  be compatible  with
          that used in the EMBL Data Library.
       -  In the  DT line,  there are  now two  spaces between the
          date and  the comment  part (instead  of one in previous
          releases).


       Organism identification code changes

       We have modified some viruses organism identification codes
       to make  them compatible  with the  abbreviations  commonly
       used. Among the codes changed are those of the AIDS viruses
       which now have organism codes starting with HIV1 or HIV2.


       Various changes

       -  Keywords have  been updated  in a  significant number of
          entries.
       -  Cytochrome P450  entry names  and descriptions have been
          totally modified to take in account new nomenclature.
       -  The annotations of a number of protein families has been
          updated and  completed using recent reviews (among those
          reviewed are: cystatins, ubiquitins, RAS oncogenes, "EF-
          hand"     calcium-binding      proteins,      ferritins,
          serine/threonine protein  kinases, GTP binding proteins,
          etc).



                            THE NEXT RELEASE

       SWISS-PROT release 6.0 will be probably ready in the end of
       january or  beginning of february 1987, it will include new
       data from  PIR release  13  and  a  significant  number  of
       additional translated EMBL release 13 sequences.

       At this  stage all the sequences which are stored in SWISS-
       PROT and  which were  sequenced at  the DNA  or  RNA  level
       should have  DR lines  pointing to  the  primary  accession
       number of the nucleotide sequence entry in EMBL.

       We also  plan to  add some new feature keys and to make the
       keyword usage in SWISS-PROT more consistent.



                    APPENDIX A: DISKS FOR SWISS-PROT


       IBM PC/AT 1.2Mb disks

       -  SWISS-PROT is stored on six 1.2 Mb disks.
       -  Disks  1   to  5   each  contain   a  single  bulk  file
          (PROT5_01.BLK to  PROT5_05.BLK) which  correspond to the
          sequences adapted  from entries  in the  PIR data  bank.
          Those sequences  are classified  in the  order in  which
          they are found in the PIR data bank.
       -  Disk  6   contains  two  bulk  files:  PROT5_NW.BLK  and
          PROT5_PR.BLK. The  first bulk  file  correspond  to  new
          sequences translated from EMBL Data Library entries. The
          second one to a few "preliminary" entry sequences.


       IBM PC 360 Kb disks

       -  SWISS-PROT is stored on eighteen 360 Kb disks.
       -  Disks  1   to  15   each  contain  a  single  bulk  file
          (PROT5_01.BLK to  PROT5_15.BLK) which  correspond to the
          sequences adapted  from entries  in the  PIR data  bank.
          Those sequences  are classified  in the  order in  which
          they are found in the PIR data bank.
       -  Disks  16   to  17  each  contain  a  single  bulk  file
          (PROT5_N1.BLK and  PROT5_N2.BLK which  correspond to new
          sequences translated from EMBL Data Library entries.
       -  Disk 18  contain contains  two bulk  files: PROT5_N3.BLK
          and PROT5_PR.BLK.  The first bulk file correspond to the
          last part of the new sequences translated from EMBL Data
          Library entries.  The second  one to a few "preliminary"
          entry sequences.
      
