---
title: Swiss-Prot release 3.0
categories: sp-major
---

                                SWISS-PROT RELEASE 3.0


            Announcing SWISS-PROT release 3.0

       Release 3.0  of the  SWISS-PROT data  bank is  now available.  The total
       number of  sequence entries has grown from 3939 (in release 2.0) to 4160
       and the total number of amino-acids from 900'163 to 969'641.

       Release 3.0  has been  updated using  mainly protein  sequence data from
       release 10.0  of the  P.I.R(1) protein data bank, as well as translation
       of nucleic-acid sequence data from release 8.0 of the EMBL data library.


            Availability of SWISS-PROT.

       -  SWISS-PROT will  be available  very  soon,  on-line,  on  the  BIONET
          resource computer.
       -  EMBL will start distributing tapes of SWISS-PROT in the near future.
       -  PC/GENE American customers can acquire from IntelliGenetics both EMBL
          and SWISS-PROT on floppy media.
       -  PC/GENE European  customers will  receive SWISS-PROT  release 3  from
          GENOFIT.


            The next release.

       SWISS-PROT release  4.0 will be probably ready in the spring of 1987, it
       will include  new data  from  P.I.R,  translated  EMBL  sequences  (from
       release 9.0)  and sequences entered by the staff of Medical Biochemistry
       Department of the University of Geneva.

       A new  feature will  be introduced  in the next release: sequences whose
       three dimensional  structure has  been  published  will  have  an  extra
       reference data block pointing to the name of the entry in the Brookhaven
       National Laboratory Protein Data Bank which list atomic coordinates from
       the crystallographic  data. A new keyword: 3D-STRUCTURE will be added to
       all those sequence entries.



       A. Bairoch / 28 November 1986.
       Medical Biochemistry Department.
       University of Geneva.
       Switzerland.

       ____________________
       1  P.I.R (Protein  Identification Resource) is supported by the Division
          of Research  Resources of  the NIH  and prepared  by the staff of the
          National Biomedical Research Foundation.
      
