---
title: Swiss-Prot release 4.0
categories: sp-major
---

                                SWISS-PROT RELEASE 4.0


            Announcing SWISS-PROT release 4.0

       Release 4.0  of the  SWISS-PROT data  bank is  now available.  The total
       number of  sequence entries has grown from 4160 (in release 3.0) to 4387
       and the total number of amino-acids from 969,641 to 1,036,010.

       Release 4.0  has been  updated using  protein sequence data from release
       11.0 of  the P.I.R(1)  protein data  bank, as  well  as  translation  of
       nucleic-acid sequence data from release 10.0 of the EMBL nucleotide data
       library.


            The DR line.

       This release  introduce an  new type  of data line, the DR line which is
       used as  a   pointer on  the existence  of information  relative to  the
       stored sequence in data collections external to SWISS-PROT.

       For example:  if the  X-ray  crystallographic  atomic  coordinate  of  a
       sequence are  stored in the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (PDB) there now
       is a  DR line(s)  pointing to  the entry(s)  in  that  data  bank  which
       correspond to that sequence. All the sequences adapted from the PIR data
       bank have a DR line pointing to the original PIR entry.

       The general format of the DR line is the following:

       DR   DATA_BANK_IDENTIFIER; PRIMARY_IDENTIFIER; SECONDARY_IDENTIFIER.

       Examples of complete DR lines are shown here:

       DR   PIR; KIPGA; RELEASE 11.0, DECEMBER 1986.
       DR   PDB; 2ADK; 30-SEP-83.
       DR   EMBL; X01704; GMNOD23.

       In addition  a new  keyword: 3D-STRUCTURE  has been  added  to  all  the
       sequence entries  which have  a DR  line pointing  on the PDB structural
       data bank.


            Availability of SWISS-PROT.

       -  SWISS-PROT will  soon be  available, on-line,  on the BIONET resource
          computer.
       -  EMBL is distributing tapes of SWISS-PROT.
       -  American  customers   of  PC/GENE   can   acquire   SWISS-PROT   from
          IntelliGenetics on floppy media.
       -  European customers  of PC/GENE  will receive  SWISS-PROT release  4.0
          from GENOFIT.


            The next release.

       SWISS-PROT release  5.0 will  be probably  ready in  the end  of july or
       beginning of  august 1987,  it will  include new data from P.I.R release
       12, a  high number  of translated  EMBL sequences  (more then  300  from
       release 10.0  and 11.0)  and sequences  entered by  the staff of Medical
       Biochemistry Department  of the University of Geneva. A great proportion
       of all  the sequences  which are  stored in  SWISS-PROT and  which  were
       sequenced at  the DNA  or RNA  level will  have DR lines pointing to the
       primary accession number of the nucleotide sequence entry in EMBL.


            Direct submission of data.

       We accept and encourage direct submission of data to the SWISS-PROT data
       bank. You  can either  send your  sequence(s) on  a number  of different
       computer media  (tape, 360  Kb or  1.2Mb IBM PC floppy disks, 720 Kb 3'5
       inch disks,  most CP/M  disk  formats,  SoftStrip)  to  our  address  in
       Switzerland or send your sequence(s) by electronic mail to the following
       adresses:

            On BIONET:  bairoch(@BIONET-20.ARPA)
            On BITNET:  bairoch@cgecmu51.bitnet


       A. Bairoch / 10 June 1987.
       Medical Biochemistry Department.
       University of Geneva.
       1, Rue Michel Servet
       1211 Geneva 4
       Switzerland.

       ____________________
       (1)         P.I.R (Protein  Identification Resource) is supported by the
          Division of  Research Resources  of the NIH and prepared by the staff
          of the National Biomedical Research Foundation.
      
