---
title: Swiss-Prot release 6.0
categories: sp-major
---

                 SWISS-PROT RELEASE 6.0 RELEASE NOTES


       Date:     January 2, 1988
       Author:   A. Bairoch


                             1. INTRODUCTION

       1.1  Evolution

       Release 6.0  of SWISS-PROT  contains 6102 sequence entries,
       comprising  1'653'982  amino  acids  abstracted  from  6422
       references. This represents an increase of 25% over release
       5.0. The  recent growth  of the  data  bank  is  summarised
       below:

       Release    Date   Number of entries     Nb of amino acids

       3.0        11/86               4160               969 641
       4.0        04/87               4387             1 036 010
       5.0        09/87               5205             1 327 683
       6.0        01/88               6102             1 653 982

       1.2  Source of data

       Release 6.0  has been  updated using  protein sequence data
       from  release  14.0  of  the  PIR  (Protein  Identification
       Resource) protein  data bank,  as well  as  translation  of
       nucleotide sequence  data from  release 13.0  of  the  EMBL
       nucleotide sequence Data Library.

       As an  indication to the source of the sequence data in the
       SWISS-PROT data bank we list here the statistics concerning
       the DR (Databank Reference) pointer lines:

       Entries with pointer(s) to only PIR entri(es):          3490
       Entries with pointer(s) to only EMBL entri(es):         1173
       Entries with pointer(s) to both EMBL and PIR entri(es): 1367
       Entries with no pointers lines (entered in house):        72



         2. DESCRIPTION OF THE CHANGES MADE TO SWISS-PROT SINCE
                                RELEASE 5


       2.1  New sequence data

       We have  continued  to  scan  the  EMBL  Data  Library  for
       sequences not yet available in the protein data bank and we
       have  translated   and  annotated   some   500   additional
       sequences. In  addition to  those new  sequences, some  100
       existing entries  have  been  updated  with  sequence  data
       translated from EMBL entries.


       2.2  Modifications in the feature keys

       -  Four new  feature keys  have been  introduced with  this
          release:

          DNA_BIND:   extent of a DNA-binding region.
          INIT_MET:   to indicate that there was an initiator
                      methionine in front of the sequence first
                      residue.
          MYRISTYL:   myristylated residue.
          TRANSMEM:   extent of a transmembrane region.

       -  Two feature keys have been renamed:

          PROPEP      replace   PROP
          SIMILAR     replace   HOMOLOGY


       2.3  Format modifications

       -  Before release  6.0, if  an entry  had more  than one DT
          line, these  lines were  listed starting with the oldest
          one and ending with the most recent one. So as to follow
          the conventions  used by  the EMBL  Data Library we have
          inverted that  order: the  first DT line is now the most
          recent one.

       -  A DR  line pointing  to a PIR entry used that entry name
          as the primary identifier and the PIR release version as
          the secondary  identifier.  PIR  having  (starting  with
          release 13)  introduced accession number, we now use the
          first accession number as the primary identifier and the
          entry name as the secondary identifier. Example:

          what was:   DR   PIR; R5EC7; RELEASE 11, DECEMBER 1986.
          is now:     DR   PIR; A02768; R5EC7.


       2.4  Organism identification code changes

       -  The organism  code for  guinea-pig  which  formerly  was
          GUPIG was  changed to  CAVPO (CAvia  PORcellus) so as to
          fit with the general naming rules.
       -  We have  modified some  viruses organism  identification
          codes to  make them  compatible with  the  abbreviations
          commonly used.


       2.5  Other changes

       -  Keywords have been updated in most entries.
       -  The annotations of a number of protein families has been
          updated and completed using recent reviews.


                           3. THE NEXT RELEASE

       SWISS-PROT release  7.0 will be probably ready in beginning
       of april  1987, we  hope that  at that  stage we  will have
       caught up  with the  backlog of sequences to translate from
       the EMBL Data Library nucleotide sequences.



                         4. WE NEED YOUR HELP !

       We welcome any feedback from our users. We especially would
       appreciate that  you notify  us if  you find that sequences
       belonging to  your field  of expertise are missing from the
       data  bank.  We  also  would  like  to  be  notified  about
       annotations to  be updated,  as for example if the function
       of a protein has been clarified or if new posttranslational
       information has become available.



                    APPENDIX A: DISKS FOR SWISS-PROT


       IBM PC/AT 1.2 Mb disks

       SWISS-PROT is  stored on  seven 1.2 Mb disks. Each of these
       disk  contains   a  single   bulk  file   (PROT6_01.BLK  to
       PROT6_07.BLK):

       Disk     First sequence        Last Sequence
        1       16K$TRVPS             CRAA$LOXAF
        2       CRAA$MACMU            GMCS$MOUSE
        3       GONL$HUMAN            KRAF$MOUSE
        4       KRAF$MSV36            PGMU$RABIT
        5       PGMU$YEAST            TESB$RAT
        6       TETX$CLOTE            YX$NPVGM
        7       YXL2$EPBAR            ZEIG$MAIZE


       IBM PC 360 Kb disks

       SWISS-PROT is  stored on  twenty one  360 Kb disks. Each of
       these disk  contains a  single bulk  file (PROT6_01.BLK  to
       PROT6_21.BLK):

       Disk     First sequence        Last Sequence
        1       16K$TRVPS             ARA5$AMBEL
        2       ARAA$SALTY            CAPB$HUMAN
        3       CAPP$ECOLI            COX1$BOVIN
        4       COX1$CHLRE            CYC$HELAN
        5       CYC$HELAS             EGF$HUMAN
        6       EGF$MOUSE             FUCO$HUMAN
        7       FULC$MYXFU            H41$TETPY
        8       H42$TETPY             HEMA$INASW
        9       HEMA$INATA            IL3$HYLLA
       10       IL3$MOUSE             KPCA$BOVIN
       11       KPCB$BOVIN            LV1$CHICKL
       12       LV1A$HUMAN            NAC2$RAT
       13       NACH$ELEEL            OSTC$MACFA
       14       OSTC$MOUSE            POLG$FMDVA
       15       POLG$FMDVC            RBS$ANASP
       16       RBS$TOBAC             SCX3$BUTOC
       17       SCX3$CENSC            TINT$MOUSE
       18       TLP1$MOUSE            V55$BPT7
       19       V57$HSV11             VMSA$HPBVZ
       20       VMSA$WHV              YMC4$YEAST
       21       YMCA$ASPNI            ZEIG$MAIZE
      
