---
title: Swiss-Prot release 7.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 1988-04-07
categories: sp-major
---

                 SWISS-PROT RELEASE 7.0 RELEASE NOTES


       Date:     April 7, 1988
       Author:   A. Bairoch


                             1. INTRODUCTION

       1.1  Evolution

       Release 7.0  of SWISS-PROT  contains 6821 sequence entries,
       comprising  1'885'771  amino  acids  abstracted  from  7128
       references. This represents an increase of 11% over release
       6.0. The  recent growth  of the  data  bank  is  summarised
       below:

       Release    Date   Number of entries     Nb of amino acids

       3.0        11/86               4160               969 641
       4.0        04/87               4387             1 036 010
       5.0        09/87               5205             1 327 683
       6.0        01/88               6102             1 653 982
       7.0        04/88               6821             1 885 771


       1.2  Source of data

       Release 7.0  has been  updated using  protein sequence data
       from  release  15.0  of  the  PIR  (Protein  Identification
       Resource) protein  data bank,  as well  as  translation  of
       nucleotide sequence  data from  release 14.0  of  the  EMBL
       nucleotide sequence Data Library.

       As an  indication to the source of the sequence data in the
       SWISS-PROT data bank we list here the statistics concerning
       the DR (Databank Reference) pointer lines:

       Entries with pointer(s) to only PIR entri(es):          3487
       Entries with pointer(s) to only EMBL entri(es):         1541
       Entries with pointer(s) to both EMBL and PIR entri(es): 1683
       Entries with no pointers lines (entered in house):       110



         2. DESCRIPTION OF THE CHANGES MADE TO SWISS-PROT SINCE
                                RELEASE 6


       2.1  Sequences and annotations

       Some 700  new sequences  have been  added  since  the  last
       release, the sequence data of some 100 existing entries has
       been updated  and the  annotations of  almost 1000  entries
       have been revised.

       In particular  we have  used reviews articles to update the
       annotations  of   the  following   groups  or  families  of
       proteins: alcohol  dehydrogenases,  acylphosphatases,  beta
       lactamases,    cholinesterases,    elastases,    lysozymes,
       nitrogenases,    peroxidases,     superoxide    dismutases,
       prokaryotic  lipoproteins,   trypanosomes  variant  surface
       glycoproteins,  thioredoxins,   heat  stable  enterotoxins,
       pentraxins,   azurins,   metallothioneins,   plastocyanins,
       bowman-birk serine  protease inhibitors,  snake neurotoxins
       and  cytotoxins,  natriuretic  peptides,  growth  hormones,
       prolactins.


       2.2   Introduction of the Organism Classification (OC) line
             type

       The  OC   (Organism  Classification)   lines  contain   the
       taxonomic  classification   of  the  source  organism.  The
       classification is  listed top-down  as nodes in a taxonomic
       tree in which the most general grouping is given first. The
       individual items  are separated by semi-colons and the list
       is terminated  by a  period. The  general format for the OC
       line is:

       OC   NODE[; NODE...].

       As an  example, the  classification lines for a human (Homo
       sapiens) sequence entry should be:

       OC   EUKARYOTA; METAZOA; CHORDATA; VERTEBRATA; TETRAPODA;
       OC   MAMMALIA; EUTHERIA; PRIMATES.

       Currently, in  release 7.0,  the OC  lines only contain the
       first node  of the taxonomic tree. That node can either be:
       EUKARYOTA, PROKARYOTA  or VIRIDAE.  This will  already help
       users which  want to extract from the data bank the entries
       containing  sequences   from  eukaryotes,   prokaryotes  or
       viruses. We  plan, in  future releases, to implement a full
       set of OC lines for at least the most common species.


       2.3  Documentation changes

       Starting with  this release  we  have  introduced  two  new
       indices: an  index of the sequence of enzymes classified by
       their EC number (ECINDEX) and an index of EMBL Data Library
       sequences referenced in SWISS-PROT (EMBLTOSP).


                           3. THE NEXT RELEASE

       SWISS-PROT release  8.0 will be probably ready in beginning
       of August 1988.



                         4. WE NEED YOUR HELP !

       We welcome any feedback from our users. We especially would
       appreciate that  you notify  us if  you find that sequences
       belonging to  your field  of expertise are missing from the
       data  bank.  We  also  would  like  to  be  notified  about
       annotations to  be updated,  as for example if the function
       of  a   protein  has   been  clarified   or  if  new  post-
       translational information has become available.





                    APPENDIX A: DISKS FOR SWISS-PROT


       IBM PC/AT 1.2 Mb disks

       SWISS-PROT is  stored on  seven 1.2 Mb disks. Each of these
       disk  contains   a  single   bulk  file   (PROT7_01.BLK  to
       PROT7_07.BLK):

       Disk     First sequence        Last Sequence
        1       16K$TRVPS             COAT$CAMVC
        2       COAT$CAMVD            FIBA$CANFA
        3       FIBA$HUMAN            IACA$PIG
        4       IATP$BOVIN            MUCB$HUMAN
        5       MUCM$MOUSE            PSBD$CHLRE
        6       PSBD$MARPO            TRPE$SALTY
        7       TRPE$SERMA            ZEIG$MAIZE

       IBM PC 360 Kb disks

       SWISS-PROT is stored on twenty four (24) 360 Kb disks. Each
       of these  disk contains a single bulk file (PROT7_01.BLK to
       PROT7_24.BLK):

       Disk     First sequence        Last Sequence
        1       16K$TRVPS             ANP3$PSEAM
        2       ANP4$PSEAM            CA11$BOVIN
        3       CA11$CHICK            CGPG$BOVIN
        4       CH15$DROME            CRAA$PIG
        5       CRAA$PROCA            CYCP$RHOSH
        6       CYCP$RHOSP            ENOA$RAT
        7       ENOB$CHICK            FTSZ$ECOLI
        8       FTZ$DROME             H2A1$PSAMI
        9       H2A1$SCHPO            HBB4$SALIR
       10       HBBA$BOSJA            HXKA$YEAST
       11       HXKB$YEAST            KABL$HUMAN
       12       KABL$MLVAB            KV5J$MOUSE
       13       KV5K$MOUSE            MERB$SERMA
       14       MERB$STAAU            NFL$BOVIN
       15       NFL$HUMAN             PA2$RAT
       16       PA2$TRIOK             POL2$HPAV
       17       POLG$ENMYV            RAS$SCHPO
       18       RAS1$DROME            RPOD$BACSU
       19       RPOD$ECOLI            TALA$MPOV3
       20       TALA$MPOVA            TRFE$CHICK
       21       TRFE$HUMAN            VE59$LAMBD
       22       VE5A$HPV11            VNCS$PAVBO
       23       VNCY$MUMIM            YG12$BPT3
       24       YG13$BPT3             ZEIG$MAIZE

       IBM PS/2 720 Kb disks

       SWISS-PROT is  stored on  twelve (12) 720 Kb disks. Each of
       these disk contains two of the 360 Kb format bulk files.
      
