---
title: Swiss-Prot release 15.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 1990-08-01
categories: sp-major
---

                        SWISS-PROT RELEASE 15.0 RELEASE NOTES


                                   1. INTRODUCTION

       1.1  Evolution

    Release 15.0 of SWISS-PROT contains 16941 sequence entries, comprising 5'486'399
    amino  acids  abstracted  from 16223 references.  This represents an increase of
    12% over release 14.  The recent growth of the data bank is summarized below:

       Release    Date   Number of entries     Nb of amino acids

       3.0        11/86               4160               969 641
       4.0        04/87               4387             1 036 010
       5.0        09/87               5205             1 327 683
       6.0        01/88               6102             1 653 982
       7.0        04/88               6821             1 885 771
       8.0        08/88               7724             2 224 465
       9.0        11/88               8702             2 498 140
       10.0       03/89              10008             2 952 613
       11.0       07/89              10856             3 265 966
       12.0       10/89              12305             3 797 482
       13.0       01/90              13837             4 347 336
       14.0       04/90              15409             4 914 264
       15.0       08/90              16941             5 486 399


    Almost 1600 sequences have been added since release 14, the sequence data of 159
    existing  entries has been updated and the annotations of 2660 entries have been
    revised.  In particular we have used reviews articles to update the  annotations
    of the following groups or families of proteins:

       -  43 Kd postsynaptic proteins
       -  Alanine racemases
       -  Antifreeze proteins
       -  Aplysia neuropeptides
       -  Biopterin-dependent aromatic amino acid hydroxylases
       -  Cell shape bacterial proteins
       -  Connexins
       -  Cytomegaloviruses proteins
       -  Disintegrins
       -  Eryf1-type proteins
       -  Flagellin and other flagellar proteins
       -  Fucosidases
       -  HMG proteins
       -  Inorganic pyrophosphatases
       -  Kinesin heavy chain family proteins
       -  Methylated-DNA--protein-cysteine methyltransferases
       -  Neuromodulins (GAP-43)
       -  Pectate lyases
       -  Peroxisomal proteins
       -  Potexviruses sequences
       -  PTS proteins
       -  Pyruvoyl-dependent enzymes
       -  Ribonucleotide reductases small subunit
       -  SRF-type transcription factors
       -  Synapsins
       -  TonB-dependent receptor proteins
       -  TPR repeat proteins
       -  Transcription factor TFIID
       -  Tyrosine specific protein phosphatases
       -  Uricases



    2  DATA SOURCES

    Release 15.0 has been updated using protein sequence data from release  24.0  of
    the  PIR  (Protein  Identification  Resource)  protein  data  bank,  as  well as
    translation of nucleotide sequence data from release 23.0 of the EMBL Nucleotide
    Sequence Data Library.

    As an indication to the source of the sequence data in the SWISS-PROT data  bank
    we  list  here  the  statistics  concerning  the DR (Databank Reference) pointer
    lines:

       Entries with pointer(s) to only PIR entri(es):            2868
       Entries with pointer(s) to only EMBL entri(es):           8049
       Entries with pointer(s) to both EMBL and PIR entri(es):   5083
       Entries with no pointers lines (entered in house):         941



    3  CHANGES AT THIS RELEASE

    3.1  DR Line Format

    The DR line format has been extended  to  accept  cross-references  to  MIM  and
    REBASE.   MIM  (Mendelian Inheritance in Man) is a data bank that holds clinical
    data on a range of human genetic disease (1); REBASE is a data bank  that  holds
    data concerning type 2 restriction enzymes (2).

    For a MIM reference the primary identifier is the catalog number of the  disease
    (or  phenotype)  and  the  secondary identifier is the last revision of the data
    bank that we have used to derive the cross- reference.

    For a REBASE reference  the  primary  identifier  is  the  entry  name  and  the
    secondary  identifier  is the latest release number of the REBASE data bank that
    we have used to derive the cross-reference.

    Examples:

          DR   MIM; 24990; EIGHTH EDITION.
          DR   REBASE; BSURI; RELEASE 9007.


    (1)  McKusick Victor A., Mendelian Inheritance in Man, Catalogs of autosomal
         dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked phenotypes, Eighth edition,
         Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, (1988).

    (2)  Roberts Rich, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Box 100, Cold Spring Harbor,
         NY 11724, USA.


    4  FORTHCOMING CHANGES

    We plan to implement the following changes in release 16:


    4.1  New Linetypes:  CA and CF

    As we announced in the last release notes, the enzyme  entries  in  SWISS-  PROT
    will have two new line-types:

          CA   Description_of_catalytic_activity.
          CF   Description_of_cofactor.

    These lines will be automatically generated at each release of SWISS- PROT  from
    the  information  stored  in  the  ENZYME  data  bank.   They  will  replace the
    'CATALYTIC ACTIVITY` and 'COFACTORS` comment lines (CC) topics.  For example:

          CC   -!- CATALYTIC ACTIVITY: L-ASPARTATE + 2-OXOGLUTARATE =
                   OXALOACETATE + L-GLUTAMATE.
          CC   -!- COFACTOR: PYRIDOXAL PHOSPHATE.

    will be changed to:

          CA   L-ASPARTATE + 2-OXOGLUTARATE = OXALOACETATE + L-GLUTAMATE.
          CF   PYRIDOXAL PHOSPHATE.



    4.2  OS Line Format

    We will invert the order of the information in the OS line.  Currently  we  have
    "English  common  name  (Latin  name)";  we  will switch to "Latin name (English
    common name)".  For example:

         OS   HUMAN (HOMO SAPIENS).

    will be changed to:

         OS   HOMO SAPIENS (HUMAN).



    5  ENZYME AND PROASITE DATABASES

    Release 2.0 of the ENZYME data bank is distributed  along  with  release  15  of
    SWISS-PROT.   ENZYME  release  2.0  contains information relative to 3071 enzyme
    entries.  As it is the case for SWISS-PROT, cross-references were added to  MIM.
    See  the  User's  manual  of  ENZYME for a complete description of the syntax of
    these cross-references.

    Release 5.1 of the PROSITE data bank is distributed along  with  release  15  of
    SWISS-PROT.   PROSITE  release  5.1 does not really represent a new release; the
    only changes between release 5.0 and 5.1 are corrections of  two  format  errors
    and  updating  of  the  pointers  to the SWISS-PROT entries whose name have been
    modified between release 14 and 15.  The next release of PROSITE (6.0)  will  be
    distributed with release 16.0 of SWISS- PROT.



    6  DISTRIBUTION MEDIA

    Data is available on magnetic tape, TK50 cassette and CD-ROM.  This  section  of
    the  release  notes  applies to tape and TK50 cassette only; CD-ROM releases are
    accompanied by their own release notes which detail the file  organisation  used
    on CD.



    6.1  Tape Formats

    The distribution tapes are 9-track industry standard magnetic tapes.  Each  file
    consists  of  fixed-length  80  byte  records,  padded  with  trailing blanks as
    appropriate (except for VMS Backup  format  tapes  which  have  variable  length
    records).   Tape  format details (density, blocksize, label type, character set)
    are attached to each tape.

    In many formats, a release requires more than one  tape  volume.   In  order  to
    support  sequential volume serial numbers for multi-volume tape sets, the volume
    labels are EMBL01 for the first tape, EMBL02 for the second tape, and so on.

    VMS Backup format tapes (and all TK50 cassettes) contain the files listed below,
    in the order shown, as a single save set called SWISS15.BCK.



    6.2  Documentation

    The documentation files on tape (those ending with a file extension of .DOC) are
    designed to be easily printable.  As with all other tape files they have a fixed
    record length of 80 bytes.  The page length of 63 lines per page was  chosen  so
    that the pages will fit both on DIN A4 paper and on American 8-1/2" x 11" paper.

    Page throws are indicated by lines with  the  six  character  string  <PAGE>  in
    positions  1-6,  and  nothing  else.  If you wish to print any of these files we
    suggest you copy them down onto disk, use your local  editor  to  replace  every
    occurrence of <PAGE> in columns 1-6 by a formfeed (or whatever is appropriate to
    force a page throw on your printer), and then print them.



    6.3  Release 15 Files

    The distribution tape(s) contain the files shown below,  in  the  order  listed.
    Where more than one tape is required, subsequent volumes will continue where the
    preceding volume left off.


       File Number    File Name       Description                      #Records
       -----------    ------------    -----------------------------    --------
                 1    CONTENTS.DOC    Tape Contents (this table)             63
                 2    SWISSPRT.USR    User Manual                          1861
                 3    RELNOTES.DOC    Release Notes (this document)         934
                 4    SPECIES.NDX     Species Index                        9588
                 5    KEYWORD.NDX     Keyword Index                       18482
                 6    AUTHOR.NDX      Author Index                        81319
                 7    SHORTDIR.NDX    Short Directory Index               34794
                 8    ACNUMBER.NDX    Accession Number Index              17088
                 9    CITATION.NDX    Citation Index                      32937
                10    SPIDCODE.NDX    Species ID Code Index                3091
                11    EMBLTOSP.DOC    EMBL/SWISS-PROT Xreferences         15057
                12    ORGCODES.DOC    Organism Code List                   3223
                13    PDBTOSP.DOC     PDB/SWISS-PROT Xreferences            567
                14    JOURLIST.DOC    Journal Abbreviation List            1383
                15    DATASUB.TXT     Data Submission Form                  312
                16    SEQ.DAT         SWISS-PROT Sequence Entries        542448
                17    PROSITE.USR     PROSITE Database User Manual          915
                18    PROSITE.LIS     PROSITE Entry List                    424
                19    PROSITE.DOC     PROSITE Entry Documentation         12313
                20    PROSITE.DAT     PROSITE Database Entries             6399
                21    ENZYME.USR      ENZYME Database User Manual           487
                22    ENZYME.DAT      ENZYME Database                     17561



    7  INDEX FILE FORMATS

    The index key of each index file (keywords, authors, citations, etc.) is  sorted
    alphabetically;  the  names  of  all entries containing the index key are listed
    alphabetically after the key.  Each entry name is  accompanied  by  its  primary
    accession number.

    Except for the short directory, accession number and species  id  code  indices,
    all  index  files have the same layout:  each value of the index key begins on a
    new line in column 1, and the associated entry names begin  on  the  next  line.
    Lines containing entry names are in fixed-format, layed out as follows:

                         Columns   Description
                         -------   ---------------------------
                         14-23     entry name (left-justified)
                         29-34     primary accession number

                         36-45     entry name (left-justified)
                         51-56     primary accession number

                         58-67     entry name (left-justified)
                         73-78     primary accession number


    Up to three entry names fit on each such line; if a given  index  key  has  more
    than  three  entries associated with it, additional lines are used (with exactly
    the same layout).  This index file format is  identical  to  that  of  the  EMBL
    Nucleotide Sequence database.


    7.1  Species Index

    This file lists all  species  which  appear  in  the  database.   It  is  sorted
    alphabetically  on  (english)  common name.  The latin genus and species will be
    listed, if present in  the  database  entries.   Mitochondrion  and  chloroplast
    sequences  appear  under  separate  index  keys,  immediately  after the related
    nuclear sequences.  An excerpt from the species index file is given  below  (the
    ruler is presented for your convenience - it does not appear in the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    CHILEAN POTATO-TREE (SOLANUM CRISPUM)
                 PLAS$SOLCR     P00297
    CHIMPANZEE IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS (CIV) (SIV(CPZ))
                 ENV$SIVCZ      P17281 GAG$SIVCZ      P17282 NEF$SIVCZ      P17664
                 POL$SIVCZ      P17283 REV$SIVCZ      P17280 TAT$SIVCZ      P17285
                 VIF$SIVCZ      P17284 VPR$SIVCZ      P17287 VPU$SIVCZ      P17286
    CHIMPANZEE (PAN SATYRUS)
                 HBA3$PANSA     P01935
    CHIMPANZEE (PAN TROGLODYTES)
                 CD4$PANTR      P16004 HA1A$PANTR     P13748 HA1B$PANTR     P13749
                 HA1C$PANTR     P16209 HA1D$PANTR     P16210 HA1E$PANTR     P16215
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80



    7.2  Keyword Index

    This file lists all keywords which appear in the database (on the KW lines).  It
    is  sorted alphabetically on keyword.  An excerpt from the keyword index file is
    given below (the ruler is presented for your convenience - it does not appear in
    the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    ACETYLCHOLINE RECEPTOR INHIBITOR
                 CXA1$CONGE     P01519 CXA1$CONMA     P01521 CXA1$CONST     P15471
                 CXA2$CONGE     P01520
    ACIDIC PROTEIN
                 143E$BOVIN     P11576 B23$RAT        P13084 B231$HUMAN     P08693
                 B232$HUMAN     P06748 BAT$HALHA      P13260 CALQ$CANFA     P12637
                 CALQ$RABIT     P07221 CENB$HUMAN     P07199 CMGA$HUMAN     P10645
                 CMGA$RAT       P10354 GRPE$ECOLI     P09372 MK16$YEAST     P10962
                 NFL$BOVIN      P02548 NO38$CHICK     P16039 NU38$XENLA     P07222
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80



    7.3  Author Index

    This file lists all author names which appear in citations (on the RA lines)  in
    the database.  It is sorted alphabetically on name.  Names are presented as they
    appear in the database entries (i.e.  as cited in  publications)  -  we  do  not
    attempt  to  handle  multiple  surname spellings, or different initials, for the
    same author.  An excerpt from the author index file is given below (the ruler is
    presented for your convenience - it does not appear in the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    AAN F.
                 PT3G$SALTY     P02908
    AARDEN L.A.
                 IL6$HUMAN      P05231
    AARONSON R.P.
                 HEMA$INCCA     P03465
    AARONSON S.
                 PGDS$HUMAN     P16234
    AARONSON S.A.
                 3ORF$EIAV1     P11305 DBL$HUMAN      P10911 ENV$EIAV1      P11306
                 ENV$SMSAV      P03384 GAG$AVISN      P03342 GAG$MSVMO      P03334
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80



    7.4  Short Directory Index

    This file contains summary  information  about  all  entries  in  the  database,
    including  a  brief description of the entry, its sequence length, molecule type
    and data management class.  The file is sorted  alphabetically  on  entry  name.
    The lines are fixed-format, layed out as follows:

         Columns   Field Name          Description
         -------   ---------------     -------------------------------------------
         01-10     entry name          left-justified
         14-14     data class          s = standard
                                       u = unannotated
                                       p = preliminary
                                       r = unreviewed
         16-18     molecule type       PRT (protein)
         20-25     sequence length     right-justified
         27-80     description         left-justified


    If an entry's description occupies more than 54 characters (cols 27-80), it will
    be  continued  onto  one or more continuation lines.  Continuation lines contain
    description text (left-justified) in cols  27-80;  cols  01-26  are  blank.   An
    excerpt  from  the  short  description  index  file is given below (the ruler is
    presented for your convenience - it does not appear in the index file):


    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    104K$THEPA   s PRT    924 104 KD MICRONEME-RHOPTRY ANTIGEN - THEILERIA PARVA
    10KA$MYCTU   s PRT    100 BCG-A HEATSHOCK PROTEIN (10 KD ANTIGEN) -
                              MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS
    10KS$HUMAN   s PRT     91 10 KD SECRETORY PROTEIN PRECURSOR - HUMAN (HOMO
                              SAPIENS)
    10KS$RAT     s PRT     18 10 KD SECRETORY PROTEIN (CC10) (FRAGMENT) - RAT
                              (RATTUS NORVEGICUS)
    110K$PLAKN   s PRT    296 110 KD ANTIGEN (PK110) (FRAGMENT) - PLASMODIUM
                              KNOWLESI
    11KD$ADE02   s PRT     79 11 KD CORE PROTEIN PRECURSOR (LATE L2 MU CORE PROTEIN)
                              (PROTEIN X) - ADENOVIRUS TYPE 2
    11SB$CUCMA   s PRT    480 11-S GLOBULIN BETA SUBUNIT PRECURSOR - PUMPKIN
                              (CUCURBITA MAXIMA)
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80



    7.5  Accession Number Index

    This  file  lists  all  accession  numbers  in  the  database.   It  is   sorted
    alphabetically  on  accession  number.  Each accession number is followed by the
    name and primary accession number of every entry in which it occurs.

    The lines are fixed-format, layed out exactly the same as the other index files;
    the only difference is that the index key (accession number) appears on the same
    line (in cols 1-6) as the list of entries which contain the key.  In  the  other
    index  files,  the  index  key  appears  on  a  line by itself.  This index key,
    however, is short enough to fit on the same line as the  entries,  and  we  have
    done this to save space.

    Accession numbers which have been deleted from the database also appear in  this
    index, containing the word DELETED (left-justified) in the entry name field.

    An excerpt from the accession number index file is given  below  (the  ruler  is
    presented for your convenience - it does not appear in the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    P00836       ATPE$HORVU     P00836
    P00837       ATPG$ECOLI     P00837
    P00838       ATPG$ECOLI     P00837
    P00839       ATPL$BOVIN     P00839 ATPM$BOVIN     P07926
    P00840       ATP9$MAIZE     P00840
    P00841       ATP9$YEAST     P00841
    P00842       ATPL$NEUCR     P00842
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80


    7.6  Citation Index

    This file lists all journal citations which  appear  in  the  database.   It  is
    sorted  alphabetically  on citation.  An excerpt from the citation index file is
    given below (the ruler is presented for your convenience - it does not appear in
    the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    ANN. GENET. SEL. ANIM. 4:515-521(1972)
                 CASK$BOVIN     P02668
    ANN. INST. PASTEUR IMMUNOL. 127C:261-271(1976)
                 KV3F$HUMAN     P01624
    ANN. INST. PASTEUR IMMUNOL. 132D:77-88(1981)
                 HV41$MOUSE     P01811
    ANN. N.Y. ACAD. SCI. 165:360-377(1969)
                 HBB$ATEGE      P02034
    ANN. N.Y. ACAD. SCI. 241:436-438(1974)
                 HBB$RABIT      P02057
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80


    7.7  Species ID Code Index

    This file lists all species id codes which appear in the database.  It is sorted
    alphabetically  on species id code.  Each code is followed by a (sorted) list of
    all sequence entry codes which are associated with the  species  id  code.   The
    sequence  entry  code is the first component of each entry name (before the "$")
    and the species id code is the second component of each entry  name  (after  the
    "$").   For  example, the entry called COA3$ADEA2 has a species id code of ADEA2
    and a sequence entry code of COA3.

    Each species id code starts on a  new  line,  occupying  columns  1-5,  and  the
    associated  sequence entry codes (each up to 4 characters long) start in columns
    10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, ...  70, 75.  If there are more than 14  sequence  entry
    codes  for  a  given species id, as many continuation lines as necessary will be
    used, with columns 1-9 left blank.

    An excerpt from the species id code index file is  given  below  (the  ruler  is
    presented for your convenience - it does not appear in the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    ACHKL    CALM
    ACHLY    API
    ACIBA    KKA
    ACICA    BEND CATA CATM DHGA DHGB ELH2 MURO PQQ1 PQQ2 PQQ3 PQQ5 PQQL PQQR TRPB
             TRPC TRPD TRPF TRPG
    ACIFE    HGDA HGDB YHGD
    ACIGL    ASPQ
    ACIGU    PRT1
    ACISP    CYMO
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80


    8  WE NEED YOUR HELP !

    We welcome  any  feedback  from  our  users.   We  would  especially  appreciate
    information  about  any sequences belonging to your field of expertise which are
    missing from the database.  We also would like to be notified about  annotations
    which  should be updated (e.g.  if the function of a protein has been clarified,
    or if new post-translational information has become available).


                                       APPENDIX A

                                    SOME STATISTICS



    A.1  AMINO ACID COMPOSITION

    Composition in percent for the complete database:

       Ala (A) 7.70   Gln (Q) 4.09   Leu (L) 9.09   Ser (S) 7.07
       Arg (R) 5.25   Glu (E) 6.28   Lys (K) 5.84   Thr (T) 5.86
       Asn (N) 4.42   Gly (G) 7.15   Met (M) 2.30   Trp (W) 1.31
       Asp (D) 5.23   His (H) 2.27   Phe (F) 3.95   Tyr (Y) 3.20
       Cys (C) 1.83   Ile (I) 5.39   Pro (P) 5.11   Val (V) 6.49
       Asx (B) 0.01   Glx (Z) 0.01   Xaa (X) 0.04

    Classification of the amino acids by their frequency:

       Leu, Ala, Gly, Ser, Val, Glu, Thr, Lys, Ile, Arg, Asp, Pro, Asn, Gln,
       Phe, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp



    A.2  DISTRIBUTION OF SEQUENCES BY SPECIES

    Total number of species represented in this release of the database:  2363.

            Species represented 1x: 1051
                                2x:  435
                                3x:  237
                                4x:  135
                                5x:  108
                                6x:   84
                                7x:   46
                                8x:   31
                                9x:   48
                               10x:   20
                           11- 20x:   84
                           21-100x:   66
                             >100x:   18

    Table of the most common species:

        Number   Frequency          Species

             1        1462          Human
             2        1246          Escherichia coli
             3         829          Mouse
             4         712          Rat
             5         549          Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
             6         404          Bovine
             7         297          Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
             8         267          Chicken
             9         220          Rabbit
            10         200          Bacillus subtilis
            11         191          Pig
            12         189          Human cytomegalovirus (strain AD169)
            13         159          African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis)
            14         157          Salmonella typhimurium
            15         142          Bacteriophage T4
            16         126          Maize
            17         113          Rice
            18         106          Tobacco
            19          98          Vaccinia virus
            20          92          Wheat
            21          86          Pea
            22          84          Liverwort (Marchantia polymorpha)
            23          80          Staphylococcus aureus
            24          78          Slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum)
                        78          Spinach
            26          77          Soybean
            27          76          Barley
                        76          Sheep
            29          70          Herpes simplex virus type 1 (strain 17)
            30          67          Varicella-Zoster virus (strain Dumas)


    A.3  DISTRIBUTION OF SEQUENCES BY LENGTH


              From   To  Number             From   To   Number

                 1-  50    1079             1001-1100      145
                51- 100    1962             1101-1200       98
               101- 150    2833             1201-1300       79
               151- 200    1690             1301-1400       50
               201- 250    1345             1401-1500       41
               251- 300    1205             1501-1600       18
               301- 350    1039             1601-1700       21
               351- 400    1056             1701-1800       18
               401- 450     785             1801-1900       16
               451- 500     860             1901-2000       19
               501- 550     665             2001-2100        8
               551- 600     435             2101-2200       22
               601- 650     315             2201-2300       22
               651- 700     236             2301-2400       10
               701- 750     225             2401-2500       10
               751- 800     158             >2500           32
               801- 850     131
               851- 900     144
               901- 950      85
               951-1000      84

    Currently the five largest sequences are:

         RYNR$RABIT  5037 a.a.
         APB$HUMAN   4563 a.a.
         APOA$HUMAN  4548 a.a.
         DMD$HUMAN   3685 a.a.
         DMD$CHICK   3660 a.a.
      
