---
title: Swiss-Prot release 14.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 1990-04-01
categories: sp-major
---

                        SWISS-PROT RELEASE 14.0 RELEASE NOTES


                                   1. INTRODUCTION

       1.1  Evolution

    Release 14.0 of SWISS-PROT contains 15409 sequence entries,  comprising  4914264
    amino  acids  abstracted  from 15054 references.  This represents an increase of
    13% over release 13.0.  The recent growth of the database is summarized below:

         Release    Date   Number of entries     Nb of amino acids

         3.0        11/86               4160               969 641
         4.0        04/87               4387             1 036 010
         5.0        09/87               5205             1 327 683
         6.0        01/88               6102             1 653 982
         7.0        04/88               6821             1 885 771
         8.0        09/88               7724             2 224 465
         9.0        12/88               8702             2 498 140
         10.0       03/89              10008             2 952 613
         11.0       06/89              10856             3 265 966
         12.0       10/89              12305             3 797 482
         13.0       01/90              13837             4 347 336
         14.0       04/90              15409             4 914 264

    Almost 1600 sequences have been added since release 13, the sequence data of 191
    existing  entries has been updated and the annotations of 2650 entries have been
    revised.  In particular we have used reviews articles to update the  annotations
    of the following groups or families of proteins:

         2-S seed storage proteins
         3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenases
         Acyl-CoA dehydrogenases
         Acylphosphatases
         Albumin / AFP / VDBP family
         Aldo/keto reductases
         Alkaline phosphatases
         Amino acid permeases
         Arthropod hemocyanins / insect LSPs
         Bacterial activator proteins, gntR family
         Calcitonin / CGRP / IAPP family
         Cecropin family
         Copper type II, ascorbate-dependent monooxygenases
         Cytochromes b/b6
         DNA ligases
         Enoyl-CoA hydratases
         Glutamine synthetases
         Growth factor and cytokines receptors
         Isocitrate lyases
         Lamins
         Leguminous lectins
         Nerve growth factor family
         Nitrogenase component 1 subunits
         Phosphoglycerate mutases
         Phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetases
         Phosphoribosylglycinamide synthetases
         Phytochromes
         Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) family
         Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)
         Protamine P1
         Rieske iron-sulfur proteins
         Rotaviruses proteins
         Sulfatases
         Thiolases
         Tryptophan synthetases
         Ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolases
         Ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes
         Ureases
         Urokinases and tissue plasminogen activators
         Zinc carboxypeptidases



    2  DATA SOURCES

    Release 14.0 has been updated using protein sequence data from release  23.0  of
    the  PIR  (Protein  Identification  Resource)  protein  data  bank,  as  well as
    translation of nucleotide sequence data from release 22.0 of the EMBL Nucleotide
    Sequence Database.

    As an indication to the source of the sequence data in the SWISS-PROT data  bank
    we  list  here  the  statistics  concerning  the DR (Databank Reference) pointer
    lines:

    Entries with pointer(s) to only PIR entri(es):                  3079
    Entries with pointer(s) to only EMBL entri(es):                 6896
    Entries with pointer(s) to both EMBL and PIR entri(es):         4557
    Entries with no pointers lines (entered in house):               877



    3  CHANGES AT THIS RELEASE

    3.1  OG Line Format

    The OG (OrGanelle) line format has been extended to take  into  account  protein
    sequences  from  genes  originating  from  the  cyanelle  of  bacteria  such  as
    Cyanophora paradoxa.  The valid syntax is:

         OG   CYANELLE.



    3.2  DR Line Format

    The DR line format has been extended to accept cross-references to PROSITE,  the
    data  bank  of sites and pattern in proteins which is now being distributed with
    SWISS-PROT.  The primary identifier is the PROSITE  accession  number,  and  the
    secondary identifier is the PROSITE entry name.  Examples:

         DR   PROSITE; PS00088; SOD_MN.
         DR   PROSITE; PS00021; KRINGLE.


    3.3  New CC Line Topics

    As of release 14 we have added two new topics for the  comments  (CC)  linetype:
    ENZYME REGULATION, and TISSUE SPECIFICITY.  Example of their usage:

         CC   -!- ENZYME REGULATION: THE ACTIVITY OF THIS ENZYME IS CONTROLLED
         CC       BY ADENYLATION. THE FULLY ADENYLATED ENZYME COMPLEX IS
         CC       INACTIVE.

         CC   -!- TISSUE SPECIFICITY: KIDNEY; SUBMAXILLARY GLAND; URINE.



    3.4  Documentation Files

    The file ECNUMBER.DOC, which contained an index  of  SWISS-PROT  enzyme  entries
    classified  by  EC  number,  is  no longer distributed.  This information can be
    found in the new database ENZYME which is now distributed with SWISS-PROT.

    The JOURLIST.DOC file now includes the ISSN numbers for all  journals  cited  in
    SWISS-PROT and PROSITE.

    For the sake of  consistency  with  the  newly  introduced  PROSITE  and  ENZYME
    databases,  the  name  of  the SWISS-PROT User Manual file has been changed from
    USRMAN.DOC to SWISSPRT.USR.  All three databases  now  have  .USR  as  the  file
    extension for their User Manual files.



    4  NEW PROSITE DATABASE

    PROSITE is a compilation of sites and patterns found in protein sequences.  This
    database consists of two files:  the first file contains the patterns as well as
    the results of the scan of  SWISS-PROT  for  these  patterns,  the  second  file
    contains  the documentation that fully describes each pattern.  A sample pattern
    entry and its corresponding documentation entry are shown below.

    The use of protein sequence patterns (or motifs) to determine the function(s) of
    proteins  is  becoming  very  rapidly  one  of  the  essential tools of sequence
    analysis.  PROSITE, as a stand-alone database is pertinent  for  such  purposes.
    But  we  also  believe that PROSITE is an important addition to SWISS-PROT as it
    allows the flexible classification of proteins into families.

    PROSITE is distributed with  SWISS-PROT;  for  a  complete  description  of  the
    content  and  format  of this database you should refer to the User Manual (file
    PROSITE.USR).


    ------------------------ Start of Sample PROSITE Entry -------------------------

    ID   CARBOXYPEPTIDASE_SER; PATTERN.
    AC   PS00131;
    DT   APR-1990 (CREATED); APR-1990 (DATA UPDATE); APR-1990 (INFO UPDATE).
    DE   Serine carboxypeptidases, serine active site.
    PA   G-E-S-Y-A-G.
    NR   /RELEASE=14,15409;
    NR   /TOTAL=7(7); /POSITIVE=7(7); /UNKNOWN=0(0); /FALSE_POS=0(0);
    NR   /FALSE_NEG=0(0);
    CC   /TAXO-RANGE=??E??; /MAX-REPEAT=1;
    CC   /SITE=3,active_site;
    DR   P10619, PRTP$HUMAN, T; P09620, KEX1$YEAST, T; P00729, CBPY$YEAST, T;
    DR   P07519, CBP1$HORVU, T; P08818, CBP2$HORVU, T; P08819, CBP2$WHEAT, T;
    DR   P11515, CBPG$WHEAT, T;
    DO   PDOC00122;
    //

    {PDOC00122}
    {PS00131; CARBOXYPEPTIDASE_SER}
    {BEGIN}
    ************************************************
    * Serine carboxypeptidases, serine active site *
    ************************************************

    All  known  carboxypeptidases  are either  metallo carboxypeptidases or serine
    carboxypeptidases (EC 3.4.16.-). The catalytic activity of the serine carboxy-
    peptidases, like  that  of  the  serine  proteases  of  the trypsin family, is
    provided by a charge relay system involving an aspartic acid residue hydrogen-
    bonded to an histidine, which itself is hydrogen-bonded to a serine.  Proteins
    known or proposed to be serine carboxypeptidases are:

       - Barley serine carboxypeptidases I and II [1,2].
       - Wheat serine carboxypeptidase II [3].
       - A probable wheat serine carboxypeptidase induced by gibberellin [4].
       - Yeast carboxypeptidase Y [5], a  vacuolar protease involved in the degra-
         dation of small peptides.
       - Yeast KEX1 protease [6], which  is  involved  in  killer toxin and alpha-
         factor precursor processing.
       - Human 'protective protein' [7], a  lysosomal  protein which appears to be
         essential for both the activity of beta-galactosidase and neuraminidase.

    The sequence in the  vicinity of the  active site  serine residue is perfectly
    conserved in all these serine carboxypeptidases.

    -Consensus pattern: G-E-S-Y-A-G
                        [S is the active site residue]
    -Sequences known to belong to this class detected by the pattern: ALL.
    -Other sequence(s) detected in SWISS-PROT: NONE.
    -Last update: October 1989 / Text revised.

    [ 1] Sorensen S.B., Breddam K., Svendsen I.
         Carlsberg Res. Commun. 51:475-485(1986).
    [ 2] Sorensen S.B., Svendsen I., Breddam K.
         Carlsberg Res. Commun. 52:285-295(1987).
    [ 3] Breddam K., Sorensen S.B., Svendsen I.
         Carlsberg Res. Commun. 52:297-311(1987).
    [ 4] Baulcombe D.C., Barker R.F., Jarvis M.G.
         J. Biol. Chem. 262:13726-13735(1987).
    [ 5] Valls L.A., Hunter C.P., Rothman J.H., Stevens T.H.
         Cell 48:887-897(1987).
    [ 6] Dmochowska A., Dignard D., Henning D., Thomas D.Y., Bussey H.
         Cell 50:573-584(1987).
    [ 7] Galjart N.J., Gillemans N., Harris A., van de Horst G.T.J.,
         Verheijen F.W., Galjaard H., D'Azzo A.
         Cell 54:755-764(1988).
    {END}

    ------------------------- End of Sample PROSITE Entry --------------------------



    5  NEW ENZYME DATABASE

    A new secondary database called ENZYME has been established.   It  contains  the
    following  data for each type of characterized enzyme for which an EC number has
    been assigned:

          o  EC number

          o  Recommended name

          o  Alternative names (if any)

          o  Catalytic activity

          o  Cofactors (if any)

          o  Pointers to the SWISS-PROT entry(ies) that correspond to the enzyme
             (if any)


    We believe that the ENZYME database will  be  useful  to  anybody  working  with
    enzymes  and will allow programs to be developed that can help with the creation
    of new metabolic pathways.

    A sample entry is shown below:

         ID   1.14.17.3
         DE   PEPTIDYLGLYCINE MONOOXYGENASE.
         AN   PEPTIDYL ALPHA-AMIDATING ENZYME.
         CA   PEPTIDYLGLYCINE + ASCORBATE + O(2) = PEPTIDYL(2-HYDROXYGLYCINE) +
         CA   DEHYDROASCORBATE + H(2)O.
         CC   THE PRODUCT IS UNSTABLE AND DISMUTATES TO GLYOXYLATE AND THE
         CC   CORRESPONDING DESGLYCINE PEPTIDE AMIDE.
         CF   COPPER.
         DR   P10731, AMD$BOVIN ;  P14925, AMD$RAT   ;  P08478, AMD1$XENLA;
         DR   P12890, AMD2$XENLA;
         //

    The impact of this new database on SWISS-PROT is the following:

          o  The ECNUMBER.DOC file is now obsolete and is now longer generated.

          o  Instead of having CC (comments) lines with the topics:

             CC   -!- CATALYTIC ACTIVITY:  description_of_catalytic_activity.
             CC   -!- COFACTOR:  description_of_cofactor.

             the enzyme entries in SWISS-PROT will, in future releases, have two new
             linetypes:

             CA   Description_of_catalytic_activity
             CF   Description_of_cofactor

             These  lines  will  be  automatically  generated  at  each  release  of
             SWISS-PROT  from  the  information  stored in the ENZYME database.  The
             introduction of these new  linetypes  is  planned  for  release  16  of
             SWISS-PROT.


    ENZYME is distributed with SWISS-PROT; for a complete description of the content
    and  format  of  this  database  you  should  refer  to  the  User  Manual (file
    ENZYME.USR).



    6  DISTRIBUTION MEDIA

    Data is available on magnetic tape, TK50 cassette and CD-ROM.  This  section  of
    the  release  notes  applies to tape and TK50 cassette only; CD-ROM releases are
    accompanied by their own release notes which detail the file  organisation  used
    on CD.



    6.1  Tape Formats

    The distribution tapes are 9-track industry standard magnetic tapes.  Each  file
    consists  of  fixed-length  80  byte  records,  padded  with  trailing blanks as
    appropriate (except for VMS Backup  format  tapes  which  have  variable  length
    records).   Tape  format details (density, blocksize, label type, character set)
    are attached to each tape.

    In many formats, a release requires more than one  tape  volume.   In  order  to
    support  sequential volume serial numbers for multi-volume tape sets, the volume
    labels are EMBL01 for the first tape, EMBL02 for the second tape, and so on.

    VMS Backup format tapes (and all TK50 cassettes) contain the files listed below,
    in the order shown, as a single save set called SWISS14.BCK.



    6.2  Documentation

    The documentation files on tape (those ending with a file extension of .DOC) are
    designed to be easily printable.  As with all other tape files they have a fixed
    record length of 80 bytes.  The page length of 63 lines per page was  chosen  so
    that the pages will fit both on DIN A4 paper and on American 8-1/2" x 11" paper.
    Page throws are indicated by lines with  the  six  character  string  <PAGE>  in
    positions  1-6,  and  nothing  else.  If you wish to print any of these files we
    suggest you copy them down onto disk, use your local  editor  to  replace  every
    occurrence of <PAGE> in columns 1-6 by a formfeed (or whatever is appropriate to
    force a page throw on your printer), and then print them.



    6.3  Release 14 Files

    The distribution tape(s) contain the files shown below,  in  the  order  listed.
    Where more than one tape is required, subsequent volumes will continue where the
    preceding volume left off.

       File Number    File Name       Description                      #Records
       -----------    ------------    -----------------------------    --------
                 1    CONTENTS.DOC    Tape Contents (this table)             63
                 2    SWISSPRT.USR    User Manual                          1829
                 3    RELNOTES.DOC    Release Notes (this document)        1063

                 4    SPECIES.NDX     Species Index                        8779
                 5    KEYWORD.NDX     Keyword Index                       16830
                 6    AUTHOR.NDX      Author Index                        74268
                 7    SHORTDIR.NDX    Short Directory Index               31363
                 8    ACNUMBER.NDX    Accession Number Index              15535
                 9    CITATION.NDX    Citation Index                      30411
                10    SPIDCODE.NDX    Species ID Code Index                2842

                11    EMBLTOSP.DOC    EMBL/SWISS-PROT Xreferences         13567
                12    ORGCODES.DOC    Organism Code List                   3199
                13    PDBTOSP.DOC     PDB/SWISS-PROT Xreferences            575
                14    JOURLIST.DOC    Journal Abbreviation List            1343
                15    DATASUB.TXT     Data Submission Form                  323

                16    SEQ.DAT         SWISS-PROT Sequence Entries        490281

                17    PROSITE.USR     PROSITE Database User Manual          915
                18    PROSITE.LIS     PROSITE Entry List                    424
                19    PROSITE.DOC     PROSITE Entry Documentation         12313
                20    PROSITE.DAT     PROSITE Database Entries             6401

                21    ENZYME.USR      ENZYME Database User Manual           427
                22    ENZYME.DAT      ENZYME Database                     12008



    7  INDEX FILE FORMATS

    The index key of each index file (keywords, authors, citations, etc.) is  sorted
    alphabetically;  the  names  of  all entries containing the index key are listed
    alphabetically after the key.  Each entry name is  accompanied  by  its  primary
    accession number.

    Except for the short directory, accession number and species  id  code  indices,
    all  index  files have the same layout:  each value of the index key begins on a
    new line in column 1, and the associated entry names begin  on  the  next  line.
    Lines containing entry names are in fixed-format, layed out as follows:


                         Columns   Description
                         -------   ---------------------------
                         14-23     entry name (left-justified)
                         29-34     primary accession number

                         36-45     entry name (left-justified)
                         51-56     primary accession number

                         58-67     entry name (left-justified)
                         73-78     primary accession number


    Up to three entry names fit on each such line; if a given  index  key  has  more
    than  three  entries associated with it, additional lines are used (with exactly
    the same layout).  This index file format is  identical  to  that  of  the  EMBL
    Nucleotide Sequence database.



    7.1  Species Index

    This file lists all  species  which  appear  in  the  database.   It  is  sorted
    alphabetically  on  (english)  common name.  The latin genus and species will be
    listed, if present in  the  database  entries.   Mitochondrion  and  chloroplast
    sequences  appear  under  separate  index  keys,  immediately  after the related
    nuclear sequences.  An excerpt from the species index file is given  below  (the
    ruler is presented for your convenience - it does not appear in the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    CHILEAN POTATO-TREE (SOLANUM CRISPUM)
                 PLAS$SOLCR     P00297
    CHIMPANZEE (PAN SATYRUS)
                 HBA3$PANSA     P01935
    CHIMPANZEE (PAN TROGLODYTES)
                 CD4$PANTR      P16004 HA1A$PANTR     P13748 HA1B$PANTR     P13749
                 HA1C$PANTR     P16209 HA1D$PANTR     P16210 HA1E$PANTR     P16215
                 HA1M$PANTR     P13750 HA1N$PANTR     P13751 HBAZ$PANTR     P06347
                 MBP$PANTR      P06906 MYG$PANTR      P02145 NUO4$PANTR     P03906
                 NUO5$PANTR     P03916
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80



    7.2  Keyword Index

    This file lists all keywords which appear in the database (on the KW lines).  It
    is  sorted alphabetically on keyword.  An excerpt from the keyword index file is
    given below (the ruler is presented for your convenience - it does not appear in
    the index file):


    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    ACETYLCHOLINE RECEPTOR INHIBITOR
                 CXA1$CONGE     P01519 CXA1$CONMA     P01521 CXA1$CONST     P15471
                 CXA2$CONGE     P01520
    ACIDIC PROTEIN
                 143E$BOVIN     P11576 B23$RAT        P13084 B231$HUMAN     P08693
                 B232$HUMAN     P06748 BAT$HALHA      P13260 CALQ$CANFA     P12637
                 CALQ$RABIT     P07221 CENB$HUMAN     P07199 CMGA$HUMAN     P10645
                 CMGA$RAT       P10354 GRPE$ECOLI     P09372 MK16$YEAST     P10962
                 NFL$BOVIN      P02548 NO38$CHICK     P16039 NU38$XENLA     P07222
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80



    7.3  Author Index

    This file lists all author names which appear in citations (on the RA lines)  in
    the database.  It is sorted alphabetically on name.  Names are presented as they
    appear in the database entries (i.e.  as cited in  publications)  -  we  do  not
    attempt  to  handle  multiple  surname spellings, or different initials, for the
    same author.  An excerpt from the author index file is given below (the ruler is
    presented for your convenience - it does not appear in the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    AAN F.
                 PT3G$SALTY     P02908
    AARDEN L.A.
                 IL6$HUMAN      P05231
    AARONSON R.P.
                 HEMA$INCCA     P03465
    AARONSON S.
                 PGDS$HUMAN     P16234
    AARONSON S.A.
                 3ORF$EIAV1     P11305 DBL$HUMAN      P10911 ENV$EIAV1      P11306
                 ENV$SMSAV      P03384 GAG$AVISN      P03342 GAG$MSVMO      P03334
                 GAG$SMSAV      P03330 KMOS$MSVMO     P00538 PDGB$HUMAN     P01127
                 POL$EIAV1      P11204 POL$MMTVB      P03365 POL$SMSAV      P03359
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80



    7.4  Short Directory Index

    This file contains summary  information  about  all  entries  in  the  database,
    including  a  brief description of the entry, its sequence length, molecule type
    and data management class.  The file is sorted  alphabetically  on  entry  name.
    The lines are fixed-format, layed out as follows:

         Columns   Field Name          Description
         -------   ---------------     -------------------------------------------
         01-10     entry name          left-justified
         14-14     data class          s = standard
                                       u = unannotated
                                       p = preliminary
                                       r = unreviewed
         16-18     molecule type       PRT (protein)
         20-25     sequence length     right-justified
         27-80     description         left-justified


    If an entry's description occupies more than 54 characters (cols 27-80), it will
    be  continued  onto  one or more continuation lines.  Continuation lines contain
    description text (left-justified) in cols  27-80;  cols  01-26  are  blank.   An
    excerpt  from  the  short  description  index  file is given below (the ruler is
    presented for your convenience - it does not appear in the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    104K$THEPA   p PRT    924 104 KD MICRONEME-RHOPTRY ANTIGEN - THEILERIA PARVA
    10KA$MYCTU   s PRT    100 BCG-A HEATSHOCK PROTEIN (10 KD ANTIGEN) -
                              MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS
    10KS$HUMAN   s PRT     91 10 KD SECRETORY PROTEIN PRECURSOR - HUMAN (HOMO
                              SAPIENS)
    110K$PLAKN   s PRT    296 110 KD ANTIGEN (PK110) (FRAGMENT) - PLASMODIUM
                              KNOWLESI
    11KD$ADE02   s PRT     79 11 KD CORE PROTEIN PRECURSOR (LATE L2 MU CORE PROTEIN)
                              (PROTEIN X) - ADENOVIRUS TYPE 2
    11SB$CUCMA   s PRT    480 11-S GLOBULIN BETA SUBUNIT PRECURSOR - PUMPKIN
                              (CUCURBITA MAXIMA)
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80



    7.5  Accession Number Index

    This  file  lists  all  accession  numbers  in  the  database.   It  is   sorted
    alphabetically  on  accession  number.  Each accession number is followed by the
    name and primary accession number of every entry in which it occurs.

    The lines are fixed-format, layed out exactly the same as the other index files;
    the only difference is that the index key (accession number) appears on the same
    line (in cols 1-6) as the list of entries which contain the key.  In  the  other
    index  files,  the  index  key  appears  on  a  line by itself.  This index key,
    however, is short enough to fit on the same line as the  entries,  and  we  have
    done this to save space.

    Accession numbers which have been deleted from the database also appear in  this
    index, containing the word DELETED (left-justified) in the entry name field.

    An excerpt from the accession number index file is given  below  (the  ruler  is
    presented for your convenience - it does not appear in the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    P00835       ATPE$MAIZE     P00835
    P00836       ATPE$HORVU     P00836
    P00837       ATPG$ECOLI     P00837
    P00838       ATPG$ECOLI     P00837
    P00839       ATPL$BOVIN     P00839 ATPM$BOVIN     P07926
    P00840       ATP9$MAIZE     P00840
    P00841       ATP9$YEAST     P00841
    P00842       ATPL$NEUCR     P00842
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80



    7.6  Citation Index

    This file lists all journal citations which  appear  in  the  database.   It  is
    sorted  alphabetically  on citation.  An excerpt from the citation index file is
    given below (the ruler is presented for your convenience - it does not appear in
    the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    ANN. GENET. SEL. ANIM. 4:515-521(1972)
                 CASK$BOVIN     P02668
    ANN. INST. PASTEUR IMMUNOL. 127C:261-271(1976)
                 KV3F$HUMAN     P01624
    ANN. INST. PASTEUR IMMUNOL. 132D:77-88(1981)
                 HV41$MOUSE     P01811
    ANN. N.Y. ACAD. SCI. 165:360-377(1969)
                 HBB$ATEGE      P02034
    ANN. N.Y. ACAD. SCI. 241:436-438(1974)
                 HBB$RABIT      P02057
    ANN. N.Y. ACAD. SCI. 356:1-13(1980)
                 CALM$METSE     P02596
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80



    7.7  Species ID Code Index

    This file lists all species id codes which appear in the database.  It is sorted
    alphabetically  on species id code.  Each code is followed by a (sorted) list of
    all sequence entry codes which are associated with the  species  id  code.   The
    sequence  entry  code is the first component of each entry name (before the "$")
    and the species id code is the second component of each entry  name  (after  the
    "$").   For  example, the entry called COA3$ADEA2 has a species id code of ADEA2
    and a sequence entry code of COA3.

    Each species id code starts on a  new  line,  occupying  columns  1-5,  and  the
    associated  sequence entry codes (each up to 4 characters long) start in columns
    10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, ...  70, 75.  If there are more than 14  sequence  entry
    codes  for  a  given species id, as many continuation lines as necessary will be
    used, with columns 1-9 left blank.

    An excerpt from the species id code index file is  given  below  (the  ruler  is
    presented for your convenience - it does not appear in the index file):

    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    ACEME    PER  RBS1 RBS2 RBS3 RBS4 RBS5
    ACENE    CYC
    ACHKL    CALM
    ACHLY    API
    ACIBA    KKA
    ACICA    BEND CATA CATM DHGA DHGB ELH2 MURO PQQ1 PQQ2 PQQ3 PQQ5 PQQL PQQR TRPC
             TRPD TRPG
    ACIFE    HGDA HGDB YHGD
    ACIGL    ASPQ
    ACIGU    PRT1
    +--------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
    1       10        20        30        40        50        60        70        80



    8  WE NEED YOUR HELP !

    We welcome  any  feedback  from  our  users.   We  would  especially  appreciate
    information  about  any sequences belonging to your field of expertise which are
    missing from the database.  We also would like to be notified about  annotations
    which  should be updated (e.g.  if the function of a protein has been clarified,
    or if new post-translational information has become available).



                                       APPENDIX A

                                    SOME STATISTICS



    A.1  AMINO ACID COMPOSITION

    Composition in percent for the complete database:

         Ala (A) 7.69   Gln (Q) 4.11   Leu (L) 9.10   Ser (S) 7.06
         Arg (R) 5.21   Glu (E) 6.30   Lys (K) 5.86   Thr (T) 5.84
         Asn (N) 4.43   Gly (G) 7.17   Met (M) 2.30   Trp (W) 1.32
         Asp (D) 5.24   His (H) 2.26   Phe (F) 3.95   Tyr (Y) 3.20
         Cys (C) 1.83   Ile (I) 5.39   Pro (P) 5.12   Val (V) 6.48
         Asx (B) 0.01   Glx (Z) 0.01   Xaa (X) 0.04


    Classification of the amino acids by their frequency:

         Leu, Ala, Gly, Ser, Val, Glu, Lys, Thr, Ile, Asp, Arg, Pro, Asn, Gln,
         Phe, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp


    A.2  DISTRIBUTION OF SEQUENCES BY SPECIES

    Total number of species represented in this release of the database:  2192.

         Species represented 1x: 964
                             2x: 413
                             3x: 224
                             4x: 127
                             5x:  96
                             6x:  76
                             7x:  40
                             8x:  29
                             9x:  47
                            10x:  24
                        11- 20x:  75
                        21-100x:  60
                          >100x:  17

    Table of the most common species:

         Number   Frequency          Species

              1        1336          Human
              2        1150          Escherichia coli
              3         763          Mouse
              4         652          Rat
              5         501          Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
              6         387          Bovine
              7         263          Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
              8         253          Chicken
              9         210          Rabbit
             10         176          Pig
             11         169          Bacillus subtilis
             12         146          African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis)
             13         134          Salmonella typhimurium
             14         132          Bacteriophage T4
             15         118          Maize
             16         104          Rice
                        104          Tobacco
             18          85          Wheat
             19          84          Liverwort (Marchantia polymorpha)
             20          77          Pea
             21          75          Slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum)
                         75          Spinach
                         75          Staphylococcus aureus
             24          74          Soybean
             25          73          Vaccinia virus



    A.3  DISTRIBUTION OF SEQUENCES BY LENGTH


         From   To  Number             From   To   Number

            1-  50    1012             1001-1100      131
           51- 100    1810             1101-1200       84
          101- 150    2648             1201-1300       68
          151- 200    1546             1301-1400       46
          201- 250    1233             1401-1500       35
          251- 300    1093             1501-1600       17
          301- 350     929             1601-1700       20
          351- 400     939             1701-1800       16
          401- 450     699             1801-1900       13
          451- 500     786             1901-2000       18
          501- 550     601             2001-2100        7
          551- 600     381             2101-2200       19
          601- 650     279             2201-2300       19
          651- 700     199             2301-2400       10
          701- 750     196             2401-2500        9
          751- 800     125             >2500           29
          801- 850     115
          851- 900     134
          901- 950      71
          951-1000      72

    Currently the five largest sequences are:

         RYNR$RABIT  5037 a.a.
         APB$HUMAN   4563 a.a.
         APOA$HUMAN  4548 a.a.
         DMD$HUMAN   3685 a.a.
         DMD$CHICK   3660 a.a.
      
