---
title: Swiss-Prot release 20.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 1991-11-01
categories: sp-major
---

                        SWISS-PROT RELEASE 20.0 RELEASE NOTES


                                   1. INTRODUCTION

       1.1  Evolution

       Release 20.0  of SWISS-PROT  contains 22654 sequence entries, comprising
       7'500'130 amino  acids abstracted from 22830 references. This represents
       an increase of 5% over release 19. The recent growth of the data bank is
       summarized below.

       Release    Date   Number of entries     Nb of amino acids

       3.0        11/86               4160               969 641
       4.0        04/87               4387             1 036 010
       5.0        09/87               5205             1 327 683
       6.0        01/88               6102             1 653 982
       7.0        04/88               6821             1 885 771
       8.0        08/88               7724             2 224 465
       9.0        11/88               8702             2 498 140
       10.0       03/89              10008             2 952 613
       11.0       07/89              10856             3 265 966
       12.0       10/89              12305             3 797 482
       13.0       01/90              13837             4 347 336
       14.0       04/90              15409             4 914 264
       15.0       08/90              16941             5 486 399
       16.0       11/90              18364             5 986 949
       17.0       02/91              20024             6 524 504
       18.0       05/91              20772             6 792 034
       19.0       08/91              21795             7 173 785
       20.0       11/91              22654             7 500 130

       1.2  Source of data

       Release 20.0  has been  updated using protein sequence data from release
       29.0 of  the PIR (Protein Identification Resource) protein data bank, as
       well as translation of nucleotide sequence data from release 28.0 of the
       EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database.

       As an  indication to  the source  of the sequence data in the SWISS-PROT
       data bank we list here the statistics concerning the DR (Database cross-
       references) pointer lines:

       Entries with pointer(s) to only PIR entri(es):           4129
       Entries with pointer(s) to only EMBL entri(es):          2970
       Entries with pointer(s) to both EMBL and PIR entri(es): 15061
       Entries with no pointers lines:                           494









    <PAGE>




          2. DESCRIPTION OF THE CHANGES MADE TO SWISS-PROT SINCE RELEASE 19


       2.1  Sequences and annotations

       About 890  sequences have been added since release 19, the sequence data
       of 187  existing entries  has been  updated and  the annotations of 3030
       entries have  been revised.  In particular we have used reviews articles
       to update  the annotations  of  the  following  groups  or  families  of
       proteins:

       -  Aminotransferases class-II and class-III
       -  Aromatic amino acids permeases
       -  Avidin/Streptavidin
       -  Bacterial porins
       -  Bacterial regulatory proteins, asnC family
       -  Bacterial regulatory proteins, crp family
       -  Bacterial ring hydroxylating dioxygenases
       -  Beta-ketoacyl synthases
       -  C3HC4-class zinc finger proteins
       -  Chalcone and resveratrol synthases
       -  Chromo domain proteins
       -  DEAD-box family ATP-dependent helicases
       -  Flagella basal body rod proteins
       -  GATA transcription factors
       -  Glutamate / Leucine / Phenylalanine dehydrogenases
       -  Glycosyl hydrolase family 1
       -  Glycosyl hydrolase family 9
       -  Glycosyl hydrolase family 10
       -  Glycosyl hydrolase family 17
       -  Heme oxygenase
       -  High potential iron-sulfur proteins
       -  HIV envelope proteins
       -  Initiation factor 5a (eIF-5a)
       -  Interferon regulatory factors
       -  Myelin P0 protein
       -  Myelin proteolipid protein
       -  PEP-utilizing enzymes
       -  pfkB family prokaryotic carbohydrate kinases
       -  Plant lipid transfer proteins
       -  PTS Hpr component
       -  Ribosomal proteins
       -  Saposins
       -  Serine/threonine protein kinases











    <PAGE>



       2.2  Changes in the feature table

            2.2.1  The LIPID key

       Until this  release SWISS-PROT  was very  inconsistent in the use of the
       feature table  to annotate  the covalent binding of lipids (fatty acids,
       prenyl groups,  or glycolipids)  to a  specific position  in  a  protein
       sequence. The  attachment of  a myristate  group was  indicated  by  the
       `MYRISTYL' key,  the attachment of a palmitate group was indicated using
       either the  `MOD_RES' or  the `BINDING' keys, prenylation and GPI-anchor
       were indicated using the `BINDING' key.

       To correct  these inconsistencies  we have  introduced in this release a
       new key `LIPID' and we have deleted the `MYRISTYL' key.

       Definition of the new key:

                    LIPID  - Covalent binding of a lipidic moiety

       The  chemical  nature  of  the  bound  lipid  moiety  is  given  in  the
       description. The general format of the LIPID description field is:

            FT   LIPID       xxx    xxx       MODIFICATION (COMMENT).

       The modifications which are currently defined are the following:

       MYRISTATE          Myristate group attached through an amide bond to the
                          N-terminal glycine  residue of  the mature  form of a
                          protein [1,2].

       PALMITATE          Palmitate group  attached through a thioether bond to
                          a cysteine  residue or  through an  ester bond  to  a
                          serine or threonine residue [1,2].

       FARNESYL           Farnesyl group attached through a thioether bond to a
                          cysteine residue [3].

       GERANYL-GERANYL    Geranyl-geranyl group  attached through  a  thioether
                          bond to a cysteine residue [3].

       GPI-ANCHOR         Glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol (GPI)  group linked  to
                          the alpha-carboxyl group of the C-terminal residue of
                          the mature form of a protein [4,5].

       N-ACYL DIGLYCERIDE N-terminal  cysteine   of  the   mature  form   of  a
                          prokaryotic lipoprotein  with an  amide-linked  fatty
                          acid and  a glyceryl  group to  which two fatty acids
                          are linked by ester linkages [6].

       [1] Grand R.J.A.
           Biochem. J. 258:626-638(1989).
       [2] McLhinney R.A.J.
           Trends Biochem. Sci. 15:387-391(1990).




    <PAGE>



       [3] Glomset J.A., Gelb M.H., Farnsworth C.C.
           Trends Biochem. Sci. 15:139-142(1990).
       [4] Low M.G.
           FASEB J. 3:1600-1608(1989).
       [5] Low M.G.
           Biochimica Biophysica Acta 988:427-454(1989).
       [6] Hayashi S., Wu H.C.
           J. Bioenerg. Biomembr. 22:451-471(1990).

       Examples of LIPID key feature lines:

          FT   LIPID         1      1       MYRISTATE.
          FT   LIPID        65     65       PALMITATE (BY SIMILARITY).
          FT   LIPID       354    354       GPI-ANCHOR.


            2.2.2  The VARSPLIC key

       There are  some genes  which, by  the mechanism of alternative splicing,
       encode closely  related proteins  that differs  only by  the presence or
       absence of  one or  more domains.  Generally  a  single  sequence  entry
       represents the longest form of the protein and the feature table is used
       to indicate  the regions  which differ in alternative spliced forms. The
       `VARIANT' key was used for such purpose. For example (from entry P04085;
       PGDA$HUMAN):

          FT   VARIANT     194    196       GRP -> DVR (IN SHORT FORM).
          FT   VARIANT     197    211       MISSING (IN SHORT FORM).

       It was  very difficult  to write  software tools  that could distinguish
       between the  above usage of the `VARIANT' key and the more classical use
       to describe  polymorphisms  or  natural  mutations.  We  have  therefore
       introduced  in   this  release  a  new  key  `VARSPLIC'  which  is  used
       specifically to describe splicing variants.

       The example shown above is know represented by:

          FT   VARSPLIC    194    196       GRP -> DVR (IN SHORT FORM).
          FT   VARSPLIC    197    211       MISSING (IN SHORT FORM).


       2.3  Changes in the cross-references lines (DR)

            2.3.1  Cross-references to EcoGene

       Starting with this release we have added cross-references to the EcoGene
       section  of  the  EcoSeq/EcoMap  integrated  Escherichia  coli  database
       prepared  by   Ken  Rudd   at  the  National  Center  for  Biotechnology
       Information (NCBI)  (for a description see: Rudd K.E., Miller W., Werner
       C., Ostell  J., Tolstoshev  C., and Satterfield S.G.; Nucleic Acids Res.
       (1991) 19:637-647).






    <PAGE>


       These cross-references are present in the DR lines:

       Data bank identifier: ECOGENE
       Primary identifier  : EcoGene gene accession number
       Secondary identifier: Gene designation
       Example             : DR   ECOGENE; EG10075; AROC.

       The collaboration  with Ken  Rudd goes  much further  than simply adding
       these cross-references.  Thanks to  this collaboration we have been able
       to update  hundreds of  Escherichia coli  sequence entries  (to add data
       concerning the function of some proteins, to resolve sequence conflicts,
       to add references and comments, etc.), we are also using his master list
       of  sequenced   genes  to  pinpoint  missing  sequences.  We  have  also
       implemented his  gene name  nomenclature for hypothetical proteins. This
       scheme is described below.

       Unnamed Escherichia  coli hypothetical  proteins and proteins of unknown
       function are  assigned gene  names based  upon their  position on the E.
       coli genomic  physical map. They all begin with the letter `Y'. The next
       two letters  designate which  1/100th of  the map  (starting at  the thr
       locus) contain  the ORF  in the  order YAA, YAB, ..YAJ, YBA, YBB, ..YBJ,
       YCA, YCB, ..YJJ. ORF's within any one of these 100 intervals are given a
       fourth letter  (A-Z) that serves to distinguish them but is not meant to
       convey position information.

            2.3.2  FlyBase

       The official name of Michael Ashburner Drosophila Genetics Maps Database
       has been changed from `DMAP' to `FlyBase'; we have therefore changed the
       data bank  identifier in  the DR  line from  `DMAP' to `FLYBASE' for all
       cross-references to that data collection.



       2.4  Minor change in the RL lines for thesis references

       Up till  now, thesis  references have been formatted as in the following
       example:

            RL   UNPUBLISHED (1972) THESIS, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY, USA.

       In recognition  of the  fact  that  theses  are  generally  regarded  as
       published references  we will  format them  as follows starting with the
       current release:

            RL   THESIS (19YY), INSTITUTION_NAME, COUNTRY.

       Example:

            RL   THESIS (1972), GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY, USA.







    <PAGE>



       For those  of you  who write  software to  parse reference  blocks,  the
       presence of  the word `THESIS' as the first word on the first RL line of
       a reference  block will  thus indicate a thesis reference. The remaining
       text consists  of a  parenthesized year followed by the institution name
       followed by the country where that institution is localized.


                                3. FORTHCOMING CHANGES

       The following changes will be implemented starting with release 21.

       3.1  Change in the format of the entry names

       The dollar  sign `$'  in entry  names will be replaced by the underscore
       character `_'.  This change  is made  on the behalf of users of sequence
       analysis software  running under  the Unix  operating system,  where the
       dollar sign  is a  reserved symbol.  Example: the entry name `CYC$HUMAN'
       will be changed to `CYC_HUMAN'.

       3.2  New line type GN

       The GN  (Gene Name) line is a new line that will be used to indicate the
       name(s) of  the gene(s)  that encodes  for the  protein being described.
       Currently this  information is  found in  the DE  line as  shown in  the
       following example:

            DE   SERUM ALBUMIN PRECURSOR (GENE NAME: ALB).

       The format of the GN line will be:

            GN   NAME1[ AND|OR NAME2...].

       Examples:

            GN   ALB.
            GN   REX-1.

       It often  occurs that  more than  one gene  name has been assigned to an
       individual locus. In that case all the synonyms will be listed. The word
       `OR' separates the different designations. The first name in the list is
       assumed to be the most correct (or most current) designation. Example:

            GN   HNS OR DRDX OR OSMZ OR BGLY.

       In a few cases, multiple genes encode for an identical protein sequence.
       In that case all the different gene names will be listed. The word `AND'
       separates the designations. Example:

            GN   CECA1 AND CECA2.








    <PAGE>



       In very  rare cases  (only one  occurrence has been found in the current
       release) `AND'  and `OR' could be both present. In that case parenthesis
       are used as shown in the following example:

            GN   GVPA AND (GVPB OR GVPA2).


       3.3  New line type RM

       The RM  (Reference Medline)  line will  be used  to indicate the Medline
       Unique Identifier  (UID) of  a reference.  This information is currently
       listed in  the RC  line using  the  `MEDLINE'  token  as  shown  in  the
       following example:

            RC   MEDLINE=90205618;

       The format of the RM line will be:

            RM   nnnnnnnn

       where `nnnnnnnn' is the eight digit Medline Unique Identifier (UID).

       Example:

            RM   90205618


       3.4  Secondary structure information

       Thanks to  the help of Chris Sander of the Biocomputing group at EMBL we
       are going  to add  in the  feature table  of each  sequence  entry  that
       belongs to  a protein  whose tertiary  structure is known, the secondary
       structure information  corresponding to  that protein.  Complete details
       regarding this  new feature  will be  communicated in  the next  release
       notes.



                                4. ENZYME AND PROSITE

       4.1  The ENZYME data bank

       Release 7.0 of the ENZYME data bank is distributed along with release 19
       of SWISS-PROT.  ENZYME release 7.0 contains information relative to 3072
       enzymes. The  data bank  is complete  and up  to date.  Until new enzyme
       nomenclature data  is published  we only  plan to  update the SWISS-PROT
       pointers at  each release  of the  protein sequence  data bank,  correct
       eventual errors,  and complete  the information  concerning synonyms and
       cofactors using the literature.








    <PAGE>



       4.2  The PROSITE data bank

       Release 8.00  of the PROSITE data bank is distributed along with release
       20 of  SWISS-PROT. Release 8.00 contains 530 documentation chapters that
       describes 605 different patterns.

            4.2.1  What's new in release 8.0

       Since the  last major release of PROSITE (release 7.01 of June 1991), 88
       new chapters have been added and 210 chapters have been updated. The new
       chapters are:

       -  Fibrinogen beta and gamma chains C-terminal domain signature
       -  Somatomedin B domain signature
       -  Cellulose-binding domain, bacterial type
       -  Cellulose-binding domain, fungal type
       -  Zinc finger, C3HC4 type, signature
       -  IRF family signature
       -  TEA domain signature
       -  Fibrillarin signature
       -  Bacterial regulatory proteins, asnC family signature
       -  Bacterial regulatory proteins, merR family signature
       -  HMG-I and HMG-Y DNA-binding domain (A+T-hook)
       -  Chromo domain
       -  Nuclear transition protein 1 signature
       -  Ribosomal protein L6 signature
       -  Ribosomal protein L16 signature
       -  Ribosomal protein L29 signature
       -  Ribosomal protein L33 signature
       -  Ribosomal protein L19e signature
       -  Ribosomal protein L32e signature
       -  Ribosomal protein S3 signature
       -  Ribosomal protein S5 signature
       -  Ribosomal protein S14 signature
       -  Ribosomal protein S4e signature
       -  Ribosomal protein S6e signature
       -  Ribosomal protein S24e signature
       -  FMN-dependent alpha-hydroxy acid dehydrogenases active site
       -  Eukaryotic molybdopterin oxidoreductases signature
       -  Delta 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase signature
       -  Pyridine nucleotide-disulphide oxidoreductases class-II active site
       -  Respiratory chain NADH dehydrogenase 30 Kd subunit signature
       -  Respiratory chain NADH dehydrogenase 49 Kd subunit signature
       -  Bacterial ring hydroxylating dioxygenases alpha-subunit signature
       -  Heme oxygenase signature
       -  Beta-ketoacyl synthases active site
       -  Transglutaminases active site
       -  Aminotransferases class-II pyridoxal-phosphate attachment site
       -  Aminotransferases class-III pyridoxal-phosphate attachment site
       -  Phosphoserine aminotransferase signature







    <PAGE>



       -  pfkB family prokaryotic carbohydrate kinases signatures
       -  Phosphoribulokinase signature
       -  Thymidine kinase cellular-type signature
       -  DNA polymerase family X signature
       -  PEP-utilizing enzymes phosphorylation site signature
       -  cAMP phosphodiesterases class-II signature
       -  Ribonuclease III family signature
       -  Ribonuclease T2 family histidine active sites
       -  Glycosyl hydrolases family 1 active site
       -  Glycosyl hydrolases family 9 active site
       -  Glycosyl hydrolases family 10 active site
       -  Glycosyl hydrolases family 17 signature
       -  Alkylbase DNA glycosidases alkA family signature
       -  Matrixins cysteine switch
       -  Amidases signature
       -  ATP synthase c subunit signature
       -  Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (ATP) signature
       -  Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase class-II signature
       -  Porphobilinogen deaminase cofactor-binding site
       -  Ferrochelatase signature
       -  Aldose 1-epimerase putative active site
       -  Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase signature
       -  Ubiquitin-activating enzyme signature
       -  Adenylosuccinate synthetase active site
       -  Argininosuccinate synthase signatures
       -  Cytochrome b559 subunits heme-binding site signature
       -  High potential iron-sulfur proteins signature
       -  Bacterioferritin signature
       -  Hemerythrins signature
       -  Avidin / Streptavidin family signature
       -  Plant lipid transfer proteins signature
       -  Aromatic amino acids permeases signature
       -  General diffusion gram-negative porins signature
       -  Eukaryotic porin signature
       -  Myelin basic protein signature
       -  Myelin P0 protein signature
       -  Myelin proteolipid protein signature
       -  Synaptophysin / synaptoporin signature
       -  Flagella basal body rod proteins signature
       -  Plant viruses icosahedral capsid proteins 'S' region signature
       -  Bacterial chemotaxis sensory transducers signature
       -  Interleukin-10 signature
       -  LIF / OSM family signature
       -  Pyrokinins signature
       -  Hok/gef family cell toxic proteins signature
       -  Lambdoid phages regulatory protein CIII signature
       -  Stathmin family signature
       -  HlyD family secretion proteins signature
       -  Seminal vesicle protein II repeats signature








    <PAGE>



            4.2.2  New /SKIP-FLAG qualifier for CC lines

       Some  PROSITE  keys  such  as  those  describing  commonly  found  post-
       translational modifications  (a typical  example is N-glycosylation) are
       found in  the majority of known protein sequences. While it is generally
       useful to note their presence, some programs may want, in some cases, to
       ignore those  keys. For  this purpose  these keys are indicated with the
       following qualifier in their CC lines:

       CC   /SKIP-FLAG=TRUE;


            4.2.3  The new 3D line type

       We have  introduced a new line: 3D (3D-structure), which is used to list
       the code(s)  of X-ray  crystallography Protein  Data Bank  (PDB) entries
       that contain structural data corresponding the sequence region described
       in a PROSITE entry. The format of the 3D line is:

       3D   name; [name2;...]

       Example:

       3D   7WGA; 9WGA; 1WGC; 2WGC;



                                5. WE NEED YOUR HELP !

       We welcome  feedback from our users. We would especially appreciate that
       you notify  us if  you find  that sequences  belonging to  your field of
       expertise are  missing from  the data  bank. We  also would  like to  be
       notified about annotations to be updated, as for example if the function
       of a protein has been clarified or if new post-translational information
       has become available.






















    <PAGE>




                             APPENDIX A: SOME STATISTICS



       A.1  Amino acid composition

            A.1.1  Composition in percent for the complete data bank

       Ala (A) 7.65   Gln (Q) 4.08   Leu (L) 9.12   Ser (S) 7.10
       Arg (R) 5.23   Glu (E) 6.27   Lys (K) 5.85   Thr (T) 5.85
       Asn (N) 4.46   Gly (G) 7.10   Met (M) 2.32   Trp (W) 1.30
       Asp (D) 5.25   His (H) 2.27   Phe (F) 3.95   Tyr (Y) 3.21
       Cys (C) 1.81   Ile (I) 5.45   Pro (P) 5.08   Val (V) 6.49

       Asx (B) 0.01   Glx (Z) 0.01   Xaa (X) 0.03


            A.1.2  Classification of the amino acids by their frequency

       Leu, Ala, Gly, Ser, Val, Glu, Lys, Thr, Ile, Asp, Arg, Pro, Asn, Gln,
       Phe, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp



       A.2  Repartition of the sequences by their organism of origin

       Total number of species represented in this release of SWISS-PROT: 3029

            A.2.1 Table of the frequency of occurrence of species

            Species represented 1x: 1303
                                2x:  548
                                3x:  308
                                4x:  189
                                5x:  131
                                6x:  100
                                7x:   73
                                8x:   47
                                9x:   64
                               10x:   32
                           11- 20x:  117
                           21-100x:   92
                             >100x:   25













    <PAGE>





            A.2.2  Table of the most represented species

        Number   Frequency          Species
             1        1847          Human
             2        1596          Escherichia coli
             3        1083          Mouse
             4        1014          Rat
             5         778          Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
             6         511          Bovine
             7         435          Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
             8         374          Chicken
             9         311          Bacillus subtilis
            10         266          Rabbit
                       266          African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis)
            12         251          Vaccinia virus (strain Copenhagen)
            13         245          Pig
            14         208          Salmonella typhimurium
            15         193          Human cytomegalovirus (strain AD169)
            16         166          Bacteriophage T4
            17         160          Maize
            18         133          Rice
            19         118          Vaccinia virus (strain WR)
                       118          Tobacco
            21         113          Pea
            22         111          Wheat
            23         110          Staphylococcus aureus
            24         101          Slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum)
                       101          Barley
            26         100          Sheep
            27          94          Fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
            28          93          Pseudomonas aeruginosa
            29          92          Spinach
            30          89          Pseudomonas putida
            31          86          Soybean
                        86          Neurospora crassa
            33          85          Dog
            34          84          Liverwort (Marchantia polymorpha)
            35          82          Klebsiella pneumoniae

















    <PAGE>





       A.3  Repartition of the sequences by size



                   From   To  Number             From   To   Number
                      1-  50    1494             1001-1100      210
                     51- 100    2500             1101-1200      131
                    101- 150    3559             1201-1300      108
                    151- 200    2181             1301-1400       64
                    201- 250    1817             1401-1500       54
                    251- 300    1634             1501-1600       32
                    301- 350    1494             1601-1700       25
                    351- 400    1436             1701-1800       26
                    401- 450    1104             1801-1900       30
                    451- 500    1188             1901-2000       23
                    501- 550     881             2001-2100        9
                    551- 600     619             2101-2200       25
                    601- 650     438             2201-2300       31
                    651- 700     319             2301-2400       11
                    701- 750     297             2401-2500       13
                    751- 800     232             >2500           53
                    801- 850     187
                    851- 900     194
                    901- 950     119
                    951-1000     116


       Currently the ten largest sequences are:


                                RYNR$RABIT  5037 a.a.
                                RYNR$HUMAN  5032 a.a.
                                APB$HUMAN   4563 a.a.
                                APOA$HUMAN  4548 a.a.
                                DYHC$TRIGR  4466 a.a.
                                POLG$BVDV   3988 a.a.
                                POLG$HCVA   3898 a.a.
                                POLG$HCVB   3898 a.a.
                                TRX$DROME   3759 a.a.
                                ACVA$PENCH  3746 a.a.















    <PAGE>



                             APPENDIX B: ON-LINE EXPERTS


       B.1  List of on-line experts for PROSITE and SWISS-PROT


    Field of expertise            Name               Email address
    ---------------------------   ------------------ ----------------------------
    African swine fever virus     Yanez R.J.         ryanez@cbm2.uam.es
    Alcohol dehydrogenases        Joernvall H.       hans.jornvall@k1m.ki.se
                                  Persson B.         bengt@medfys.ki.se
    Aldehyde dehydrogenases       Joernvall H.       hans.jornvall@k1m.ki.se
                                  Persson B.         bengt@medfys.ki.se
    Alpha-crystallins/HSP-20      Leunissen J.A.M.   jackl@caos.caos.kun.nl
                                  de Jong W.         u629000@hnykun11.bitnet
    Alpha-2-macroglobulins        Van Leuven F.      fred@blekul13.bitnet
    Apolipoproteins               Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    Arrestins                     Kolakowski L.F.Jr. kolakowski@helix.mgh.harvard.edu
    Bacteriophage P4 proteins     Halling C.         chh9@midway.uchicago.edu
    Beta-lactamases               Brannigan J.       jab5@vaxa.york.ac.uk
    Chitinases                    Henrissat B.       cermav@frgren81.bitnet
    Clusterin                     Peitsch M.C.       peitsch@ulbio1.unil.ch
    CTF/NF-I                      Mermod N.          nmermod@ulys.unil.ch
    Cytochromes P450              Holsztynska E.J.   ela@netcom.uucp
                                                     netcom!ela@apple.com
    EF-hand calcium-binding       Cox J.A.           cox@sc2a.unige.ch
                                  Kretsinger R.H.    rhk5i@virginia.bitnet
    Enoyl-CoA hydratase           Hofmann K.O.       khofmann@cipvax.biolan.uni-koeln.de
    fruR/lacI family HTH proteins Reizer J.          jreizer@ucsd.edu
    GATA-type zinc-fingers        Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    Glucanases                    Henrissat B.       cermav@frgren81.bitnet
                                  Beguin P.          phycel@pasteur.bitnet
    G-protein coupled receptors   Chollet A.         chollet@clients.switch.ch
                                  Attwood T.K.       bph6tka@biovax.leeds.ac.uk
    GTPase-activating proteins    Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    HMG1/2 and HMG-14/17          Landsman D.        landsman@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    Inorganic pyrophosphatases    Kolakowski L.F.Jr. kolakowski@helix.mgh.harvard.edu
    Integrases                    Roy P.H.           2020000@lavalvx1.bitnet
    Lipocalins                    Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
                                  Peitsch M.C.       peitsch@ulbio1.unil.ch
    MAC components / perforin     Peitsch M.C.       peitsch@ulbio1.unil.ch
    Myelin proteolipid protein    Hofmann K.O.       khofmann@cipvax.biolan.uni-koeln.de
    PEP requiring enzymes         Reizer J.          jreizer@ucsd.edu
    Phytochromes                  Partis M.D.        partis@gcri.afrc.ac.uk
    Prokaryotic carbohydrate      Reizer J.          jreizer@ucsd.edu
                kinases
    Protein kinases               Hanks S.           hanks@vuctrvax.bitnet
                                  Hunter T.          hunter@salk.bitnet
    PTS proteins                  Reizer J.          jreizer@ucsd.edu
    Restriction-modification      Bickle T.          bickle@urz.unibas.ch
                enzymes           Roberts R.J.       roberts@cshl.org






    <PAGE>




    Ribosomal protein S3          Hallick R.         hallick%biotec@arizona.edu
    Ribosomal protein S15         Ellis S.R.         srelli01@ulkyvm.bitnet
    Ring-cleavage dioxygenases    Harayama S.        harayama@cmu.unige.ch
    Sodium symporters             Reizer J.          jreizer@ucsd.edu
    Subtilases                    Brannigan J.       jab5@vaxa.york.ac.uk
    Thiol proteases               Turk B.            turk@ijs.ac.mail.yu
    Thiol proteases inhibitors    Turk B.            turk@ijs.ac.mail.yu
    TPR repeats                   Boguski M.S.       boguski@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
    Transit peptides              von Heijne G.      gunnar@cbts.sunet.se
    Type-II membrane antigens     Levy S.            levy@cellbio.stanford.edu
    Uracil-DNA glycosylase        Aasland R.         aasland@bio.uib.no
    Xylose isomerase              Jenkins J.         jenkins@frira.afrc.ac.uk



       B.2  Requirements to fulfill to become an on-line expert

       An expert  should be  a scientist  working with  specific famili(es)  of
       proteins (or specific domains) and which would:

       a) Review the  protein sequences in SWISS-PROT and the patterns/matrices
          in PROSITE relevant to their field of research.
       b) Agree to  be contacted  by people  that have obtained new sequence(s)
          which seem to belong to "their" familie(s) of proteins.
       c) Have access  to electronic  mail and be willing to use it to send and
          receive data.

       If you are willing to be part of this scheme please contact Amos Bairoch
       at one of the following electronic mail addresses:

                               bairoch@cgecmu51.bitnet
                                 bairoch@cmu.unige.ch
























    <PAGE>




               APPENDIX C: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN BIOMOLECULAR DATABASES

       The current  status of the relationships (cross-references) between some
       biomolecular databases is shown in the following schematic:

                                                           **********************
                            *********************** <----- * EPD [Euk. Promot.] *
                            *  EMBL Nucleotide    * -----> **********************
                            *  Sequence Data      *
    ***************** ----> *  Library            *        **********************
    * FLYBASE       *       *********************** <----- * ECD [E. coli map]  *
    * [Drosophila   *                ^  |       ^          **********************
    * genetic maps] * --------+      |  |       |
    ***************** <-----+ |      |  |       +--------- **********************
                            | |      |  |       +--------- * TFD [Trans. fact.] *
                            | |      |  |       | +------> **********************
                            | |      |  |       | |
    *****************       | v      |  v       v |        **********************
    * REBASE        *       ***********************        * ENZYME [Nomencl.]  *
    * [Restriction  * <---- *  SWISS-PROT         * <----- **********************
    *  enzymes]     *       *  Protein Sequence   *            |
    *****************       *  Data Bank          *            v
                            ***********************        **********************
    *****************         | ^     |  ^ | |  |          * OMIM   [Diseases]  *
    * PROSITE       * <-------+ |     |  | | |  +--------> **********************
    * [Patterns]    * ----------+     |  | | |
    *****************                 |  | | +-----------> **********************
                 |                    |  | |               * E. coli 2D gels    *
                 |                    |  | |               **********************
                 |                    |  | |
                 |                    |  | +-------------> **********************
                 |                    v  +---------------- * EcoGene/EcoSeq     *
                 |          ***********************        **********************
                 +--------> * PDB [3D structures] *
                            ***********************





















    <PAGE>
      
