---
title: Swiss-Prot release 30.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 1994-10-01
categories: sp-major
---

                        SWISS-PROT RELEASE 30.0 RELEASE NOTES


                                   1. INTRODUCTION

       1.1  Evolution

       Release 30.0  of SWISS-PROT  contains 40292 sequence entries, comprising
       14'147'368 amino acids abstracted from 37887 references. This represents
       an increase  of 5.1% over release 29. The recent growth of the data bank
       is summarized below.

       Release    Date   Number of entries     Nb of amino acids

       2.0        09/86               3939               900 163
       3.0        11/86               4160               969 641
       4.0        04/87               4387             1 036 010
       5.0        09/87               5205             1 327 683
       6.0        01/88               6102             1 653 982
       7.0        04/88               6821             1 885 771
       8.0        08/88               7724             2 224 465
       9.0        11/88               8702             2 498 140
       10.0       03/89              10008             2 952 613
       11.0       07/89              10856             3 265 966
       12.0       10/89              12305             3 797 482
       13.0       01/90              13837             4 347 336
       14.0       04/90              15409             4 914 264
       15.0       08/90              16941             5 486 399
       16.0       11/90              18364             5 986 949
       17.0       02/91              20024             6 524 504
       18.0       05/91              20772             6 792 034
       19.0       08/91              21795             7 173 785
       20.0       11/91              22654             7 500 130
       21.0       03/92              23742             7 866 596
       22.0       05/92              25044             8 375 696
       23.0       08/92              26706             9 011 391
       24.0       12/92              28154             9 545 427
       25.0       04/93              29955            10 214 020
       26.0       07/93              31808            10 875 091
       27.0       10/93              33329            11 484 420
       28.0       02/94              36000            12 496 420
       29.0       06/94              38303            13 464 008
       30.0       10/94              40292            14 147 368



          2. DESCRIPTION OF THE CHANGES MADE TO SWISS-PROT SINCE RELEASE 29

       2.1  Sequences and annotations

       About 2005 sequences have been added since release 29, the sequence data
       of 296  existing entries  has been  updated and  the annotations of 5260
       entries have been revised.






    <PAGE>



       We are  continuing the process to 'clean-up' the various representations
       of domains  in the  feature lines  (especially the  usage of the feature
       keys "DOMAIN", "REPEAT", "DNA_BIND", and "SITE"). We also have undertook
       an overall  revision of  the CC  topics "SUBCELLULAR LOCATION", "SUBUNIT
       and "CAUTION".


       2.2  What's happening with the model organisms

       As we  announced in the last three releases we have selected a number of
       organisms that  are the  target  of  genome  sequencing  and/or  mapping
       projects and for which we intend to:

       -  Be as  complete as  possible. All sequences available at a given time
          should be  immediately included  in SWISS-PROT.  This  also  includes
          sequence corrections and updates.
       -  Provide a high level of annotations.
       -  Cross-references to specialized database(s) that contain, among other
          data, some  genetic information  about the  genes that code for these
          proteins.
       -  Provide specific indices or documents.

       What was  done since  the last  release or  in preparation  for the next
       release:

       -  We have  added Bacillus  subtilis as  a model  organism. We will soon
          link SWISS-PROT to the SubtiList database currently being designed by
          Ivan Moszer of the Pasteur Institute in Paris.
       -  The next  release of  LISTA will  include accession  numbers for each
          gene entry;  we will  therefore be able to cross-reference SWISS-PROT
          to LISTA.

       Here is the current status of the model organisms:

       Organism        Database                    Index file       Number of
                       cross-referenced                             sequences
       --------------  --------------------------  --------------   ---------
       B.subtilis      SubtiList (in preparation)  In preparation         777
       C.elegans       WormPep                     CELEGANS.TXT           688
       D.discoideum    DictyDB                     DICTY.TXT              198
       D.melanogaster  FlyBase                     In preparation         647
       E.coli          EcoGene                     ECOLI.TXT             2901
       H.sapiens       MIM                         MIMTOSP.TXT           2914
       S.cerevisiae    LISTA (in preparation)      YEAST.TXT             2287


       2.3  Changes in the CC line

       We have  introduced in  this release a new 'topic' for the comments (CC)
       line-type: DOMAIN.  This topic  is used  to describe  the general domain
       structure of a protein. It is intended to be used for general statements
       on the domain organization of specific protein and supplement the domain
       information available in the feature table.




    <PAGE>



       Examples of its usage:

       CC   -!- DOMAIN: CONTAINS A COILED-COIL DOMAIN ESSENTIAL FOR VESICULAR
       CC       TRANSPORT AND A DISPENSABLE C-TERMINAL REGION.

       CC   -!- DOMAIN: THE B CHAIN IS COMPOSED OF TWO DOMAINS, EACH DOMAIN
       CC       CONSISTS OF 3 HOMOLOGOUS SUBDOMAINS (ALPHA, BETA, GAMMA).


       The topic  "ALTERNATIVE  SPLICING"  has  been  renamed  to  "ALTERNATIVE
       PRODUCTS" as  it used  for describing  the existence  of related protein
       sequence(s) produced  by either alternative splicing of the same gene(s)
       or by the use of alternative initiation codons.

       Examples of its usage:

       CC   -!- ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS: SKELETAL MUSCLE AND FIBROBLAST
       CC       TROPOMYOSINS ARE OBTAINED BY ALTERNATIVE MRNA SPLICING.

       CC   -!- ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS: USING ALTERNATIVE INITIATION CODONS IN
       CC       THE SAME READING FRAME, THE GENE TRANSLATES INTO THREE
       CC       ISOZYMES: ALPHA, BETA AND BETA'.


       2.4  Changes in the DR line

       We  have   added  cross-references   from  SWISS-PROT   to   the   Yeast
       Electrophoresis Protein  Database (YEPD) from the Quest Protein Database
       Center of  Cold Spring  Harbor Laboratory.  These  cross-references  are
       present in the DR lines:

       Data bank identifier:    YEPD
       Primary identifier  :    Protein spot alphanumeric designation.
       Secondary identifier:    None; a dash '-' is stored in that field
       Example             :    DR   YEPD; 4270; -.


       2.5  Status of the documentation files

       SWISS-PROT is  distributed with  a large  number of documentation files.
       Some of  these files  have been  available for  a long  time  (the  user
       manual, release  notes, the  various  indices  for  authors,  citations,
       keywords, etc.),  but  many  have  been  created  recently  and  we  are
       continuously  adding  new  files.  The  following  table  list  all  the
       documents that are currently available or that will be added in the next
       few months.

       USERMAN .TXT   User manual
       RELNOTES.TXT   Release notes
       SHORTDES.TXT   Short description of entries in SWISS-PROT
       JOURLIST.TXT   List of abbreviations for journals cited
       KEYWLIST.TXT   List of keywords in use
       SPECLIST.TXT   List of organism identification codes
       EXPERTS .TXT   List of on-line experts for PROSITE and SWISS-PROT



    <PAGE>



       ACINDEX .TXT   Accession number index
       AUTINDEX.TXT   Author index
       CITINDEX.TXT   Citation index
       KEYINDEX.TXT   Keyword index
       SPEINDEX.TXT   Species index

       7TMRLIST.TXT   List of 7-transmembrane G-linked receptors entries
       CDLIST  .TXT   CD nomenclature for surface proteins of human leucocytes
       CELEGANS.TXT   Index  of   Caenorhabditis  elegans   entries  and  their
                      corresponding  gene   designations  and   WormPep  cross-
       DICTY   .TXT   Index  of  Dictyostelium  discoideum  entries  and  their
                      corresponding   gene   designations  and  DictyDB  cross-
                      references
       EC2DTOSP.TXT   Index of  Escherichia coli  Gene-protein database entries
                      referenced in SWISS-PROT
       ECOLI   .TXT   Index of  Escherichia coli  K12 chromosomal  entries  and
                      their corresponding EcoGene cross-reference [4]
       EMBLTOSP.TXT   Index of EMBL Database entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
       EXTRADOM.TXT   Nomenclature of extracellular domains [1]
       GLYCOSYL.TXT   Index of  glycosyl hydrolases  classified by  families on
                      the basis of sequence similarities [2]
       HOXLIST .TXT   Vertebrate homeobox proteins: nomenclature and index
       MIMTOSP .TXT   Index of MIM entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
       NOMLIST .TXT   List of nomenclature related references for proteins
       PDBTOSP .TXT   Index of Brookhaven PDB entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
       PLASTID .TXT   List of chloroplast and cyanelle encoded proteins
       RESTRIC .TXT   List of restriction enzymes and methylases entries
       RIBOSOMP.TXT   Index of ribosomal proteins classified by families on the
                      basis of sequence similarities [2]
       YEAST   .TXT   Index  of  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  entries  and  their
                      corresponding gene designations
       YEAST2 .TXT    Yeast Chromosome II entries [1]
       YEAST3 .TXT    Yeast Chromosome III entries [1]
       YEAST8 .TXT    Yeast Chromosome VIII entries [2]
       YEAST11 .TXT   Yeast Chromosome XI entries

       Notes:

       [1]  New in release 30.
       [2]  Will be available starting with release 31 in February 1995.


       2.6  The Expasy World-Wide Web server

       The World-Wide Web (WWW), which originated at CERN, is a powerful global
       information  system   merging  networked   information   retrieval   and
       hypertext. It  gives access, using hypertext links, to the documents and
       information contained  in all the existing WWW servers around the world,
       as well  as to  the data  obtainable through other information retrieval
       systems like WAIS, Gopher, X500, etc. To access a WWW server, one has to
       run on a local computer a client program (a WWW browser), which displays
       hypertext documents.  The user  can then either request a keyword search
       or jump  to another  document by following a hypertext link. WWW has the




    <PAGE>



       outstanding advantage  of extending  the hypertext  model to  the  whole
       world (by allowing hypertext jumps to documents anywhere on the internet
       network) and  by being  device and  user-interface independent (browsers
       exist for  a variety  of computers  and user-interfaces,  including Unix
       workstations  running  XWindows,  MacIntoshes  and  PCs  with  Microsoft
       Windows).

       The ExPASy  WWW server  allows access, using the user-friendly hypertext
       model,  to  the  SWISS-PROT,  PROSITE,  SWISS-2DPAGE  and  SWISS-3DIMAGE
       databases and,  through any  SWISS-PROT protein sequence entry, to other
       databases such  as EMBL, PROSITE, REBASE, FlyBase, GCRDb, MaizeDB, OMIM,
       PDB and Medline. Using a browser which is able to display images one can
       also remotely access 2D gels image data from SWISS-2DPAGE.

       A WWW  server can  be accessed  on  the  internet  through  its  Uniform
       Resource Locator  (URL), the addressing system defined by the WWW model.
       The URL for the ExPASy WWW server is:

                               http://expasy.hcuge.ch/
       or
                                http://129.195.254.61/

       To access a WWW server, you need to run a browser (or client) program on
       your local computer. Browsers exist for a variety of machines and may be
       obtained by  anonymous ftp. ExPASy can be used with any WWW browser, but
       we recommend  NCSA Mosaic.  It is  a very  flexible and powerful browser
       with  a  graphical  user  interface;  available  for  Unix  boxes  using
       X11/Motif; for  Apple McIntoshes  and for Microsoft Windows. You can get
       it from the FTP site: ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu.

       To access  all the  data available  from SWISS-2DPAGE,  the user's local
       computer needs  to run  an image  viewing program.  For most browsers on
       Unix workstations  the default  program is  xv, a shareware application.
       Similar Windows  or Apple  shareware or  public domain  applications are
       also available.

       For more  information on  the  ExPASy  WWW  server,  you  can  read  the
       following article:

          Appel R.D., Bairoch A., Hochstrasser D.F.
          A new  generation of  information retrieval tools for biologists: the
          example of the ExPASy WWW server.
          Trends Biochem. Sci. 19:258-260(1994).


       Or you can contact Dr. Ron Appel:

          Email: appel@cih.hcuge.ch
          Fax: +41-22-372 61 98








    <PAGE>



       2.7  Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT

       Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT are available by anonymous FTP. Three files
       are updated at each update:

       new_seq.dat    Contains all the new entries since the last full release.
       upd_seq.dat    Contains the entries for which the sequence data has been
                      updated since the last release.
       upd_ann.dat    Contains the  entries for  which one  or more  annotation
                      fields have been updated since the last release.

       Currently these  files are  available on  the  following  anonymous  ftp
       servers:

       Organization   ExPASy (Geneva University Expert Protein Analysis System)
       Address        expasy.hcuge.ch  (or 129.195.254.61)
       Directory      /databases/swiss-prot/updates

       Organization   National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
       Address        ncbi.nlm.nih.gov (or 130.14.20.1)
       Directory      /repository/swiss-prot/updates

       Organization   EBI ftp server
       Address        ftp.ebi.ac.uk (193.62.196.6)
       Directory      /pub/databases/swissprot/new

       !! Important notes !!!

       Although we  try to  follow a  regular schedule,  we do  not promise  to
       update these  files every  week. In some cases two weeks will elapse in-
       between two updates.

       Due to  the current  mechanism used  to build a release the entries that
       are provided in these updates are not guaranteed to be error free. Also,
       for the  same reason,  new  entries  do  not  contain  an  OC  (Organism
       Classification) line.



                                3. ENZYME AND PROSITE

       3.1  The ENZYME data bank

       Release 17.0  of the  ENZYME data bank is distributed with release 30 of
       SWISS-PROT. ENZYME  release 17.0  contains information  relative to 3546
       enzymes.

       3.2  The PROSITE data bank

       Release 12.1  of the PROSITE data bank is distributed with release 30 of
       SWISS-PROT.  Release  12.1  contains  785  documentation  chapters  that
       describes 1029  different patterns, rules and profiles/matrices. Release
       12.1 does  not really  represent a new release; the only changes between




    <PAGE>



       releases 12.0  and 12.1  are updating  of the pointers to the SWISS-PROT
       entries whose  name have  been modified between  releases 29 and 30. The
       next release  of PROSITE  (13.0) will  be distributed with release 31 of
       SWISS-PROT.

                                 WE NEED YOUR HELP !

       We welcome  feedback from our users. We would especially appreciate that
       you notify  us if  you find  that sequences  belonging to  your field of
       expertise are  missing from  the data  bank. We  also would  like to  be
       notified about  annotations to be updated, if, for example, the function
       of a protein has been clarified or if new post-translational information
       has become available.












































    <PAGE>

                             APPENDIX A: SOME STATISTICS



       A.1  Amino acid composition

            A.1.1  Composition in percent for the complete data bank

       Ala (A) 7.60   Gln (Q) 4.03   Leu (L) 9.22   Ser (S) 7.15
       Arg (R) 5.23   Glu (E) 6.28   Lys (K) 5.84   Thr (T) 5.81
       Asn (N) 4.48   Gly (G) 6.95   Met (M) 2.36   Trp (W) 1.28
       Asp (D) 5.29   His (H) 2.24   Phe (F) 4.01   Tyr (Y) 3.21
       Cys (C) 1.76   Ile (I) 5.61   Pro (P) 5.00   Val (V) 6.52

       Asx (B) 0.005  Glx (Z) 0.005  Xaa (X) 0.02


            A.1.2  Classification of the amino acids by their frequency

       Leu, Ala, Ser, Gly, Val, Glu, Lys, Thr, Ile, Asp, Arg, Pro, Asn, Gln,
       Phe, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp



       A.2  Repartition of the sequences by their organism of origin

       Total number of species represented in this release of SWISS-PROT: 4550

            A.2.1 Table of the frequency of occurrence of species

            Species represented 1x: 2045
                                2x:  740
                                3x:  414
                                4x:  255
                                5x:  187
                                6x:  192
                                7x:  115
                                8x:   80
                                9x:   95
                               10x:   44
                           11- 20x:  175
                           21- 50x:  122
                           51-100x:   42
                             >100x:   44















    <PAGE>



            A.2.2  Table of the most represented species

        Number   Frequency          Species
             1        2914          Human
             2        2901          Escherichia coli
             3        2287          Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
             4        1748          Mouse
             5        1610          Rat
             6         777          Bacillus subtilis
             7         723          Bovine
             8         688          Caenorhabditis elegans
             9         647          Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
            10         551          Chicken
            11         493          Salmonella typhimurium
            12         432          African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis)
            13         393          Rabbit
            14         347          Pig
            15         251          Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse-ear cress)
                       251          Vaccinia virus (strain Copenhagen)
            17         246          Maize
            18         224          Fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
            19         210          Rice
            20         200          Bacteriophage T4
            21         199          Pseudomonas aeruginosa
            22         198          Slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum)
            23         193          Human cytomegalovirus (strain AD169)
            24         184          Tobacco
            25         183          Vaccinia virus (strain WR)
            26         176          Pea
            27         170          Wheat
            28         163          Barley
            29         151          Marchantia polymorpha (Liverwort)
            30         147          Dog
            31         146          Variola virus
            32         141          Staphylococcus aureus
                       141          Sheep
            34         139          Soybean
            35         137          Pseudomonas putida
                       137          Rhodobacter capsulatus
            37         133          Spinach
            38         130          Neurospora crassa
            39         128          Klebsiella pneumoniae
            40         117          Bacillus stearothermophilus
                       117          Tomato
            42         113          Agrobacterium tumefaciens
            43         108          Potato
            44         103          Rhizobium meliloti










    <PAGE>



       A.3  Repartition of the sequences by size

                   From   To  Number             From   To   Number
                      1-  50    2250             1001-1100      378
                     51- 100    3939             1101-1200      267
                    101- 150    5433             1201-1300      198
                    151- 200    3898             1301-1400      120
                    201- 250    3409             1401-1500      115
                    251- 300    3036             1501-1600       58
                    301- 350    2862             1601-1700       55
                    351- 400    2914             1701-1800       48
                    401- 450    2171             1801-1900       57
                    451- 500    2291             1901-2000       37
                    501- 550    1656             2001-2100       20
                    551- 600    1149             2101-2200       48
                    601- 650     813             2201-2300       54
                    651- 700     617             2301-2400       21
                    701- 750     586             2401-2500       26
                    751- 800     445             >2500          122
                    801- 850     346
                    851- 900     373
                    901- 950     246
                    951-1000     234


       A.4  Longest sequences

       The longest sequences (>=4000 residues) are listed here:

                                   HTS1_COCCA  5217
                                   FAT_DROME   5147
                                   RYNR_RABIT  5037
                                   RYNR_HUMAN  5032
                                   RYNC_RABIT  4969
                                   DYHC_DICDI  4725
                                   DYHC_DROME  4639
                                   APB_HUMAN   4563
                                   APOA_HUMAN  4548
                                   RRPA_CVMJH  4488
                                   DYHC_TRIGR  4466
                                   GRSB_BACBR  4451
                                   PLEC_RAT    4140
                                   DYHC_YEAST  4092
                                   RRPA_CVH22  4085













    <PAGE>



       A.5  List of the most cited journals in SWISS-PROT

       Citations            Journal abbreviation

       4345                 J. BIOL. CHEM.
       3050                 NUCLEIC ACIDS RES.
       2777                 PROC. NATL. ACAD. SCI. U.S.A.
       1755                 J. BACTERIOL.
       1528                 FEBS LETT.
       1452                 GENE
       1407                 EUR. J. BIOCHEM.
       1243                 EMBO J.
       1227                 NATURE
       1171                 BIOCHEM. BIOPHYS. RES. COMMUN.
       1134                 BIOCHEMISTRY
        896                 J. MOL. BIOL.
        879                 BIOCHIM. BIOPHYS. ACTA
        869                 CELL
        800                 MOL. CELL. BIOL.
        715                 MOL. GEN. GENET.
        683                 VIROLOGY
        641                 BIOCHEM. J.
        620                 PLANT MOL. BIOL.
        535                 SCIENCE
        521                 J. BIOCHEM.
        475                 MOL. MICROBIOL.
        436                 J. VIROL.
        382                 J. GEN. VIROL.
        268                 J. CELL BIOL.
        247                 BIOL. CHEM. HOPPE-SEYLER
        242                 GENOMICS
        232                 GENES DEV.
        213                 HOPPE-SEYLER'S Z. PHYSIOL. CHEM.
        212                 ARCH. BIOCHEM. BIOPHYS.
        210                 CURR. GENET.
        201                 J. IMMUNOL.
        174                 MOL. BIOCHEM. PARASITOL.
        171                 MOL. ENDOCRINOL.
        169                 YEAST
        164                 J. GEN. MICROBIOL.
        154                 INFECT. IMMUN.
        150                 J. CLIN. INVEST.
        142                 DNA
        138                 ONCOGENE
        123                 PLANT PHYSIOL.
        122                 J. EXP. MED.
        122                 FEMS MICROBIOL. LETT.
        114                 J. MOL. EVOL.
        111                 AM. J. HUM. GENET.
        101                 HUM. MOL. GENET.






    <PAGE>

               APPENDIX B: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN BIOMOLECULAR DATABASES

       The current  status of the relationships (cross-references) between some
       biomolecular databases is shown in the following schematic:

                                                           **********************
                            ***********************        * EPD [Euk. Promot.] *
                            *  EMBL Nucleotide    * <----> **********************
                            *  Sequence Data      *
    ******************      *  Library            *        **********************
    * FLYBASE        * <--> *********************** <----- * ECD [E. coli map]  *
    * [Drosophila    *                ^   ^  ^             **********************
    * genomic d.b.]  * <---------+    |   |  |
    ******************           |    |   |  +------------ **********************
                                 |    |   |                * TFD [Trans. fact.] *
                                 |    |   |                **********************
    ******************           |    |   |
    * MaizeDb        * <------+  |    |   |                **********************
    ******************        |  |    |   +--------------> * GCRDb [7TM recep.] *
                              |  |    |   |                **********************
    ******************        |  |    |   |
    * WormPep        *        |  |    |   |                **********************
    * [C.elegans]    * <----+ |  |    |   |       +------> * DictyDB [D.disco.] *
    ******************      | |  |    |   |       |        **********************
                            | |  |    |   |       |
    ******************      | v  v    v   v       v        **********************
    * REBASE         *      ***********************        * ENZYME [Nomencl.]  *
    * [Restriction   * <--- *  SWISS-PROT         * <----- **********************
    *  enzymes]      *      *  Protein Sequence   *            |
    ******************      *  Data Bank          *            v
                            ***********************        **********************
    ******************       ^  ^  ^  | |  ^ ^  |          * OMIM   [Diseases]  *
    * EcoGene/EcoSeq *       |  |  |  | |  | |  +--------> **********************
    * [E. coli]      * <-----+  |  |  | |  | |
    ******************          |  |  | |  | +-----------> **********************
                                |  |  | |  |               * ECO2DBASE     [2D] *
                                |  |  | |  |               **********************
    ******************          |  |  | |  |
    * PROSITE        * <--------+  |  | |  +-------------> **********************
    * [Patterns]     *             |  | |                  * SWISS-2DPAGE  [2D] *
    ******************             |  | |                  **********************
                 |                 |  | |
                 |                 |  | +----------------> **********************
                 |                 |  |                    * Aarhus/Ghent  [2D] *
                 |                 |  +---------------+    **********************
                 |                 v                  |
                 |          ***********************   |    **********************
                 +--------> * PDB [3D structures] *   +--> * YEPD (yeast)  [2D] *
                            ***********************        **********************










    <PAGE>
      
