---
title: Swiss-Prot release 29.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 1994-06-01
categories: sp-major
---

                        SWISS-PROT RELEASE 29.0 RELEASE NOTES

                                   1. INTRODUCTION

       1.1  Evolution

       Release 29.0  of SWISS-PROT  contains 38303 sequence entries, comprising
       13'464'008 amino acids abstracted from 36638 references. This represents
       an increase  of 7.7% over release 28. The recent growth of the data bank
       is summarized below.

       Release    Date   Number of entries     Nb of amino acids

       3.0        11/86               4160               969 641
       4.0        04/87               4387             1 036 010
       5.0        09/87               5205             1 327 683
       6.0        01/88               6102             1 653 982
       7.0        04/88               6821             1 885 771
       8.0        08/88               7724             2 224 465
       9.0        11/88               8702             2 498 140
       10.0       03/89              10008             2 952 613
       11.0       07/89              10856             3 265 966
       12.0       10/89              12305             3 797 482
       13.0       01/90              13837             4 347 336
       14.0       04/90              15409             4 914 264
       15.0       08/90              16941             5 486 399
       16.0       11/90              18364             5 986 949
       17.0       02/91              20024             6 524 504
       18.0       05/91              20772             6 792 034
       19.0       08/91              21795             7 173 785
       20.0       11/91              22654             7 500 130
       21.0       03/92              23742             7 866 596
       22.0       05/92              25044             8 375 696
       23.0       08/92              26706             9 011 391
       24.0       12/92              28154             9 545 427
       25.0       04/93              29955            10 214 020
       26.0       07/93              31808            10 875 091
       27.0       10/93              33329            11 484 420
       28.0       02/94              36000            12 496 420
       29.0       06/94              38303            13 464 008

       1.2  Source of data

       Release 29.0  has been  updated using protein sequence data from release
       40.0 of  the PIR (Protein Identification Resource) protein data bank, as
       well as translation of nucleotide sequence data from release 38.0 of the
       EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database.

       As an  indication to  the source  of the sequence data in the SWISS-PROT
       data bank we list here the statistics concerning the DR (Database cross-
       references) pointer lines:

       Entries with pointer(s) to only PIR entri(es):            4682
       Entries with pointer(s) to only EMBL entri(es):           5191
       Entries with pointer(s) to both EMBL and PIR entri(es):  27691
       Entries with no pointers lines:                            739



    <PAGE>


          2. DESCRIPTION OF THE CHANGES MADE TO SWISS-PROT SINCE RELEASE 28

       2.1  Sequences and annotations

       About 2320 sequences have been added since release 28, the sequence data
       of 351  existing entries  has been  updated and  the annotations of 7300
       entries have been revised.

       We are  continuing the process to 'clean-up' the various representations
       of domains  in the  feature lines  (especially the  usage of the feature
       keys "DOMAIN", "REPEAT", "DNA_BIND", and "SITE"). We also have undertook
       an overall  revision of  the CC  topics "SUBCELLULAR LOCATION", "SUBUNIT
       and "CAUTION".

       2.2  What's happening with the model organisms

       As we  announced in  the last  two releases we have selected a number of
       organisms that  are the  target  of  genome  sequencing  and/or  mapping
       projects and for which we intend to:

       -  Be as  complete as  possible. All sequences available at a given time
          should be  immediately included  in SWISS-PROT.  This  also  includes
          sequence corrections and updates.
       -  Provide a high level of annotations.
       -  Cross-references to specialized database(s) that contain, among other
          data, some  genetic information  about the  genes that code for these
          proteins.
       -  Provide specific indices or documents.

       What was  done since  the last  release or  in preparation  for the next
       release:

       -  We have  added Homo  sapiens (human) as the sixth model organism (see
          the next section for some additional information).
       -  In the  next release  we will  add Bacillus  subtilis as  the seventh
          organism. We will link SWISS-PROT to the SubtiList database currently
          being designed by Ivan Moszer of the Pasteur Institute in Paris.
       -  The next  release of  LISTA will  include accession  numbers for each
          gene entry;  we will  therefore be able to cross-reference SWISS-PROT
          to LISTA.

       Here is the current status of the model organisms:

       Organism        Database                    Index file       Number of
                       cross-referenced                             sequences
       --------------  --------------------------  --------------   ---------
       B.subtilis      SubtiList (in preparation)  In preparation         563
       C.elegans       WormPep                     CELEGANS.TXT           679
       D.discoideum    DictyDB                     DICTY.TXT              198
       D.melanogaster  FlyBase                     In preparation         600
       E.coli          EcoGene                     ECOLI.TXT             2674
       H.sapiens       MIM                         MIMTOSP.TXT           2862
       S.cerevisiae    LISTA (in preparation)      YEAST.TXT             1951





    <PAGE>


       2.3  Human genetic diseases

       We have  made an  important effort in the implementation, in SWISS-PROT,
       of data relevant to human genetic diseases. This effort has mainly dealt
       with the following enhancements:

       a) In sequence  entries associated  with one  more genetic  diseases, we
          have  updated  and  expanded  the  annotations  characterizing  those
          diseases.  These   annotations  are  stored  in  the  CC  line  topic
          'DISEASE'.

          Examples:

       CC   -!- DISEASE: DEFECTS IN GALNS ARE A CAUSE OF  MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS
       CC       TYPE IVA (MPS IVA) (ALSO KNOWN AS MORQUIO A SYNDROME) WHICH IS
       CC       CHARACTERIZED BY SPECIFIC SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, SHORT
       CC       TRUNK DWARFISM, COXA VALGA, ODONTOID HYPOPLASIA, CORNEAL
       CC       OPACITIES, PRESERVATION OF INTELLIGENCE, AND EXCESSIVE URINARY
       CC       EXCRETION OF KERATAN SULFATE AND CHONDROITIN-6-SULFATE.

       CC   -!- DISEASE: DEFECTS IN KRT9 ARE A CAUSE OF EPIDERMOLYTIC
       CC       PALMOPLANTAR KERATODERMA (EPPK), AN AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT DISEASE
       CC       CHARACTERIZED BY DIFFUSE THICKENING OF THE EPIDERMIS ON THE
       CC       ENTIRE SURFACE OF PALMS AND SOLES SHARPLY BORDERED WITH
       CC       ERYTHEMATOUS MARGINS.


       b) We have  entered in  SWISS-PROT all the mutations linked with genetic
          diseases or  polymorphisms as  long as  they are  not  frameshift  or
          nonsense mutation. These mutations are described in the feature table
          ('VARIANT' key) and the relevant references have been added.

          Partial example  (from entry  P07949 / KRET_HUMAN) describing the RET
          protein which is linked with the diseases MEN2A, MEN2B, MTC and HSCR:

       RN   [7]
       RP   VARIANT MEN2B MET-929.
       RM   94159102
       RA   HOFSTRA R.M.W., LANDSVATER R.M., CECCHERINI I., STULP R.P.,
       RA   STELWAGEN T., LUO Y., PASINI B., HOEPPENER J.W.M.,
       RA   VAN AMSTEL H.K.P., ROMEO G., LIPS C.J.M., BUYS C.H.C.M.;
       RL   NATURE 367:375-376(1994).
       RN   [8]
       RP   VARIANTS HSCR PRO-765; GLN-897 AND GLY-972.
       RM   94159103
       RA   ROMEO G., RONCHETTO P., LUO Y., BARONE V., SERI M., CECCHERINI I.,
       RA   PASINI B., BOCCIARDI R., LERONE M., KAARLAINEN H., MARTUCCIELLO G.;
       RL   NATURE 367:377-378(1994).


       FT   VARIANT     765    765       S -> P (IN HSCR).
       FT   VARIANT     897    897       R -> Q (IN HSCR).
       FT   VARIANT     929    929       T -> M (IN MEN2B).
       FT   VARIANT     972    972       R -> G (IN HSCR).




    <PAGE>


       c) A new  CC topic  'POLYMORPHISM' has been implemented. Examples of its
          use:

       CC   -!- POLYMORPHISM: THE ALLELIC FORM OF THE ENZYME WITH GLN-191
       CC       HYDROLYZES PARAOXON WITH A LOW TURNOVER NUMBER AND THE ONE WITH
       CC       ARG-191 WITH A HIGH TURNOVER NUMBER.

       CC   -!- POLYMORPHISM: OVER 80 VARIANTS OF HUMAN DBP HAVE BEEN
       CC       IDENTIFIED. THE THREE MOST COMMON ALLELES ARE CALLED GC1F,
       CC       GC1S, AND GC2. THE SEQUENCE SHOWN IS THAT OF THE GC2 ALLELE.

       d) New keywords have been introduced:

          - 'DISEASE MUTATION' is used  for sequences in which there is at least
            one known disease-inducing mutation.
          - 'POLYMORPHISM' is used in  each entry  where "neutral" variants have
            been found (at the level of the protein sequence).
          - 'CHROMOSOMAL TRANSLOCATION' is used  to indicate proteins whose gene
            are known to be involved in chromosomal translocations.
          - Keywords have been implemented for genetic diseases linked with more
            than a single gene/protein. These keywords are:

       ALBINISM
       ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
       AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS
       ATHEROSCLEROSIS
       AUTOIMMUNE ENCEPHALOMYELITIS
       AUTOIMMUNE UVEITIS
       BERNARD SOULIER SYNDROME
       CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE
       CHRONIC GRANULOMATOUS DISEASE
       COCKAYNE'S SYNDROME
       DEJERINE-SOTTAS SYNDROME
       DIABETES
       DOWN'S SYNDROME
       DWARFISM
       ELLIPTOCYTOSIS
       EMPHYSEMA
       GAUCHER DISEASE
       GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE
       GM2-GANGLIOSIDOSIS
       GOUT
       HEMOPHILIA
       HEREDITARY HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
       HYPERLIPOPROTEINEMIA
       LEBER'S HEREDITARY OPTIC NEUROPATHY
       MAPLE SYRUP URINE DISEASE
       METACHROMATIC LEUCODYSTROPHY
       MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS
       PHENYLKETONURIA
       PSEUDOHERMAPHRODITISM
       RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA
       SCID
       SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
       THROMBOPHILIA



    <PAGE>


       VON WILLEBRAND DISEASE
       XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM

       e) The GDB list of genes has been used to update the GN (gene name) line
          of many SWISS-PROT entries.


       2.4  Changes in the DR line

       We  have  added  cross-references  from  SWISS-PROT  to  two  additional
       databases:

       -  The G-protein--coupled  receptor database  (GCRDb)  prepared  by  Lee
          Frank Kolakowski at the Massachusetts General Hospital Renal Unit.
          Reference: Kolakowski L.F. Jr.; Receptors Channels In press(1994).

       -  The Maize  Genome Database  (MaizeDB) developed by the USDA-ARS Maize
          Genome Project  as part  of the National Agricultural Library's Plant
          Genome Research Program.


       These cross-references are present in the DR lines:

       Data bank identifier:    GCRDB
       Primary identifier  :    Unique identifier  (accession  number)  of  the
                                entry
       Secondary identifier:    None; a dash '-' is stored in that field
       Example             :    DR   GCRDB; GCR_0087; -.


       Data bank identifier:    MAIZEDB
       Primary identifier  :    'Gene-product' accession ID
       Secondary identifier:    None; a dash '-' is stored in that field
       Example             :    DR   MAIZEDB; 25342; -.


       We  have   removed  from   SWISS-PROT  cross-references   to  TFD   (the
       Transcription Factor  Database). The  main reason  for this  decision is
       that the  information stored  in the 'polypeptide' table of TFD does not
       expand on the data present in the corresponding SWISS-PROT entry.


       2.5  Status of the documentation files

       SWISS-PROT is  distributed with  a large  number of documentation files.
       Some of  these files  have been  available for  a long  time  (the  user
       manual, release  notes, the  various  indices  for  authors,  citations,
       keywords, etc.),  but  many  have  been  created  recently  and  we  are
       continuously  adding  new  files.  The  following  table  list  all  the
       documents that are currently available or that will be added in the next
       few months.

       USERMAN .TXT   User manual
       RELNOTES.TXT   Release notes
       SHORTDES.TXT   Short description of entries in SWISS-PROT



    <PAGE>



       JOURLIST.TXT   List of abbreviations for journals cited
       KEYWLIST.TXT   List of keywords in use
       SPECLIST.TXT   List of organism identification codes
       EXPERTS .TXT   List of on-line experts for PROSITE and SWISS-PROT [1, 3]

       ACINDEX .TXT   Accession number index
       AUTINDEX.TXT   Author index
       CITINDEX.TXT   Citation index
       KEYINDEX.TXT   Keyword index
       SPEINDEX.TXT   Species index

       7TMRLIST.TXT   List of 7-transmembrane G-linked receptors entries
       CDLIST  .TXT   CD nomenclature for surface proteins of human leucocytes
       CELEGANS.TXT   Index  of   Caenorhabditis  elegans   entries  and  their
                      corresponding  gene   designations  and   WormPep  cross-
                      references
       DICTY   .TXT   Index  of  Dictyostelium  discoideum  entries  and  their
                      corresponding   gene   designations  and  DictyDB  cross-
                      references
       EC2DTOSP.TXT   Index of  Escherichia coli  Gene-protein database entries
                      referenced in SWISS-PROT
       ECOLI   .TXT   Index of  Escherichia coli  K12 chromosomal  entries  and
                      their corresponding EcoGene cross-reference [4]
       EMBLTOSP.TXT   Index of EMBL Database entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
       GLYCOSYL.TXT   Index of  glycosyl hydrolases  classified by  families on
                      the basis of sequence similarities [2]
       HOXLIST .TXT   Vertebrate homeobox proteins: nomenclature and index
       MIMTOSP .TXT   Index of MIM entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
       NOMLIST .TXT   List of nomenclature related references for proteins [1]
       PDBTOSP .TXT   Index of Brookhaven PDB entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
       PLASTID .TXT   List of chloroplast and cyanelle encoded proteins
       RESTRIC .TXT   List of restriction enzymes and methylases entries [1]
       RIBOSOMP.TXT   Index of ribosomal proteins classified by families on the
                      basis of sequence similarities [2]
       YEAST   .TXT   Index  of  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  entries  and  their
                      corresponding gene designations
       YEAST11 .TXT   Yeast Chromosome XI entries [1]


       Notes:

       [1]  New in release 29.
       [2]  Will be available starting with release 30 in October 1994.
       [3]  The list  of on-line  experts used to be an appendix of the release
            notes. We now provide it as a separate document.
       [4]  The format  of this  file was slightly modified in this release; we
            added a field that  indicates  if the  3D  structure  of  an E.coli
            protein is available in PDB.









    <PAGE>


       2.6  The Expasy World-Wide Web server

            2.6.1  Background information

       The World-Wide Web (WWW), which originated at CERN, is a powerful global
       information  system   merging  networked   information   retrieval   and
       hypertext. It  gives access, using hypertext links, to the documents and
       information contained  in all the existing WWW servers around the world,
       as well  as to  the data  obtainable through other information retrieval
       systems like WAIS, Gopher, X500, etc. To access a WWW server, one has to
       run on a local computer a client program (a WWW browser), which displays
       hypertext documents.  The user  can then either request a keyword search
       or jump  to another  document by following a hypertext link. WWW has the
       outstanding advantage  of extending  the hypertext  model to  the  whole
       world (by allowing hypertext jumps to documents anywhere on the internet
       network) and  by being  device and  user-interface independent (browsers
       exist for  a variety  of computers  and user-interfaces,  including Unix
       workstations  running  XWindows,  MacIntoshes  and  PCs  with  Microsoft
       Windows).

       The ExPASy  WWW server  allows access, using the user-friendly hypertext
       model,  to  the  SWISS-PROT,  PROSITE,  SWISS-2DPAGE  and  SWISS-3DIMAGE
       databases and,  through any  SWISS-PROT protein sequence entry, to other
       databases such  as EMBL, PROSITE, REBASE, FlyBase, GCRDb, MaizeDB, OMIM,
       PDB and Medline. Using a browser which is able to display images one can
       also remotely access 2D gels image data from SWISS-2DPAGE.

       A WWW  server can  be accessed  on  the  internet  through  its  Uniform
       Resource Locator  (URL), the addressing system defined by the WWW model.
       The URL for the ExPASy WWW server is:

                               http://expasy.hcuge.ch/
       or
                                http://129.195.254.61/

       To access a WWW server, you need to run a browser (or client) program on
       your local computer. Browsers exist for a variety of machines and may be
       obtained by  anonymous ftp. ExPASy can be used with any WWW browser, but
       we recommend  NCSA Mosaic.  It is  a very  flexible and powerful browser
       with  a  graphical  user  interface;  available  for  Unix  boxes  using
       X11/Motif; for  Apple McIntoshes  and for Microsoft Windows. You can get
       it from the FTP site: ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu.

       To access  all the  data available  from SWISS-2DPAGE,  the user's local
       computer needs  to run  an image  viewing program.  For most browsers on
       Unix workstations  the default  program is  xv, a shareware application.
       Similar Windows  or Apple  shareware or  public domain  applications are
       also available.

       For more  information on  the  ExPASy  WWW  server,  you  can  read  the
       following article:

          Appel R.D., Bairoch A., Hochstrasser D.F.
          A new  generation of  information retrieval tools for biologists: the
          example of the ExPASy WWW server.
          Trends Biochem. Sci. 19:258-260(1994).


    <PAGE>


       Or you can contact Dr. Ron Appel:

          Email: appel@cih.hcuge.ch
          Fax: +41-22-372 61 98


            2.6.2  Changes to the WWW ExPASy server

       There has been quite a number of changes to the server in the last three
       months. We want to list specifically the following enhancements:

       -  A direct  entry point to PROSITE has been implemented. It is possible
          to search in PROSITE by description (title of the entry), entry name,
          accession number, author name and by performing a full text search.
       -  It is  now possible to retrieve either the EMBL or GenBank version of
          a cross-referenced nucleotide sequence entry.
       -  Active cross-references  are now  provided to  GCRDb and MaizeDB (see
          section 2.4 above).
       -  New SWISS-PROT  documents such  as RESTRIC.TXT  or  YEAST11.TXT  (see
          section 2.5 above) are available as hypertext documents.


       2.7  Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT

       Since release 24, we provide weekly updates of SWISS-PROT.

       The weekly  updates are  available by  anonymous FTP.  Three  files  are
       updated at each update:

       new_seq.dat    Contains all the new entries since the last full release.
       upd_seq.dat    Contains the entries for which the sequence data has been
                      updated since the last release.
       upd_ann.dat    Contains the  entries for  which one  or more  annotation
                      fields have been updated since the last release.

       Currently these  files are  available on  the  following  anonymous  ftp
       servers:

       Organization   ExPASy (Geneva University Expert Protein Analysis System)
       Address        expasy.hcuge.ch  (or 129.195.254.61)
       Directory      /databases/swiss-prot/updates

       Organization   National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
       Address        ncbi.nlm.nih.gov (or 130.14.20.1)
       Directory      /repository/swiss-prot/updates

       Organization   EMBL ftp server
       Address        ftp.embl-heidelberg.de (or 192.54.41.33)
       Directory      /pub/databases/swissprot/new

       !! Important notes !!!

       Although we  try to  follow a  regular schedule,  we do  not promise  to
       update these  files every  week. In some cases two weeks will elapse in-
       between two updates.



    <PAGE>


       Due to  the current  mechanism used  to build a release the entries that
       are provided in these updates are not guaranteed to be error free. Also,
       for the  same reason,  new  entries  do  not  contain  an  OC  (Organism
       Classification) line.


                                3. ENZYME AND PROSITE

       3.1  The ENZYME data bank

       Release 16.0  of the  ENZYME data bank is distributed with release 29 of
       SWISS-PROT. ENZYME  release 16.0  contains information  relative to 3546
       enzymes. For the first time we have integrated information directly sent
       to us by the Enzyme nomenclature subcommitee of the NCB-IUBMB.


       3.2  The PROSITE data bank

            3.2.1  Statistics for release 12

       Release 12.0  of the PROSITE data bank is distributed with release 29 of
       SWISS-PROT.  Release   12  contains   785  documentation  chapters  that
       describes 1029  different patterns,  rules and  profiles/matrices. Since
       the last major release of PROSITE (release 11.0 of October 1993), 71 new
       chapters have been added and 338 chapters have been updated.

       Out of  a total  of  38303  entries  in  SWISS-PROT,  18786  are  cross-
       referenced in  PROSITE (excluding  the false  positives). This tally for
       exactly 49% of the sequences in SWISS-PROT.

       The next  release of  PROSITE (12.1) will be distributed with release 30
       of SWISS-PROT.


            3.2.2  List of the new entries in release 12

          Ly-6 / u-PAR domain signature
          Nuclear transition protein 2 signatures
          Ribosomal protein L19 signature
          Ribosomal protein L20 signature
          Ribosomal protein L35 signature
          Ribosomal protein L1e signature
          Ribosomal protein S2 signatures
          Ribosomal protein S7e signature
          Ribosomal protein S21e signature
          Ribosomal protein S28e signature
          DnaA protein signature
          NAD-dependent glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase signature
          FAD-dependent glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase signatures
          Mannitol dehydrogenases signature
          Coproporphyrinogen III oxidase signature
          Bacterial-type phytoene dehydrogenase signature
          Ergosterol biosynthesis ERG4/ERG24 family signatures
          Transaldolase active site




    <PAGE>


          Myristoyl-CoA:protein N-myristoyltransferase signatures
          PTS EIIB domains cysteine phosphorylation site signature
          Eukaryotic RNA polymerases 15 Kd subunits signature
          Protein phosphatase 2A regulatory subunit PR55 signatures
          Protein phosphatase 2C signature
          Glycosyl hydrolases family 16 signature
          Glycosyl hydrolases family 25 active sites signature
          Glycosyl hydrolases family 39 putative active site
          Ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolases family 2 signatures
          Glycoprotease family signature
          Dehydroquinase class I active site
          Dehydroquinase class II signature
          Imidazoleglycerol-phosphate dehydratase signatures
          Cysteine synthase/cystathionine beta-synthase P-phosphate
          Glyoxalase I signatures
          6-pyruvoyl tetrahydropterin synthase signatures
          Phosphomannose isomerase type I signatures
          Folylpolyglutamate synthase signatures
          Transposases, Mutator family, signature
          OHHL biosynthesis luxI family signature
          Succinate dehydrogenase cytochrome b subunit signatures
          Globins profile
          PTR2 family proton/oligopeptide symporters signatures
          glpT family of transporters signature
          Bacterial formate and nitrite transporters signatures
          Fungal hydrophobins signature
          G-protein coupled receptors family 3 signatures
          Antenna complexes alpha and beta subunits signatures
          Photosystem I psaG and psaK proteins signature
          ER lumen protein retaining receptor signatures
          Neuromedin U signature
          Urotensin II signature
          Neutrophil bactenecins signatures
          Gamma-thionins family signature
          Streptomyces subtilisin-type inhibitors signature
          Heat shock hsp20 proteins family profile
          Bacterial export FHIPEP family signature
          Cytochrome c oxidase assembly factor COX10/ctaB/cyoE signature
          Cyclin-dependent kinases regulatory subunits signatures
          ADP-ribosylation factors family signature
          SAR1 family signature
          Initiation factor 3 signature
          Transcription termination factor nusG signature
          BTG1 family signature
          G10 protein signatures
          Clathrin adaptor complexes medium chain signatures
          Clathrin adaptor complexes small chain signature
          Extracellular proteins SCP/Tpx-1/Ag5/PR-1/Sc7 signatures
          Oxysterol-binding protein family signature
          Serum amyloid A proteins signature
          Spermadhesins family signatures
          Syndecans signature
          Translationally controlled tumor protein signatures





    <PAGE>


            3.2.3  Status of profiles in PROSITE

       There are  a number  of  protein  families  as  well  as  functional  or
       structural domains  that cannot  be detected using patterns due to their
       extreme sequence  divergence. Typical  examples of  important functional
       domains which  are weakly  conserved are the immunoglobulin domains, the
       SH2 and SH3 domains, or the fibronectin type III domain. In such domains
       there are  only a  few sequence  positions which are well conserved. Any
       attempt of  building a  consensus pattern  for such  regions will either
       fail to  pick up  a significant proportion of the protein sequences that
       contain such  region (false  negative) or will pick up too many proteins
       that do  not contain  the region  (false positive). The use of technique
       based on  weight matrices  or profiles  allows  the  detection  of  such
       proteins or  domains. Philipp  Bucher, Kay  Hofmann at ISREC in Lausanne
       and myself are collaborating to include such methods into PROSITE.

       This is  the first  release of  PROSITE to include weight matrices (also
       known as  profiles). In  this release  only  two  profiles  entries  are
       available (for the hsp20 family of small chaperones and for globins). We
       plan to add many new profiles for the next major release (release 13) as
       well as to replace some of the existing pattern entries by profiles.

       None of  the  many  academic  or  commercial  programs  which  has  been
       developed to scan PROSITE can currently make use of the profile entries.
       We  are  therefore  distributing,  with  PROSITE,  the  source  code  (C
       language) of  two programs  that  should  help  software  developers  to
       implement profile-specific routines in their application(s):

       scan4prf Loads a  sequence from a file and scans it with all (or one) of
       the PROSITE profiles.

       srch4prf Loads a  profile from  a file  and scans  for that profile in a
       SWISS-PROT data base file.

       These programs  will  soon  be  available  in  the  respective  /prosite
       directory of  the  NCBI  and  Expasy  anonymous  FTP  servers  (for  the
       addresses, see section 2.7).

       Important notice  for software  developers: the  integration of profiles
       into PROSITE did not "break" the current format. The profiles entries in
       the PROFILE.DAT  file are  tagged with  the token  "MATRIX" on  the "ID"
       line; a  new line-type  "MA" is  used in  these entries to store all the
       weight matrices  specific parameters. The full description of the format
       of the  "MA" line-type  is available  as a  user's  manual  (file  name:
       PROFILE.TXT) that  is part of the PROSITE distribution files. The format
       of the PROSITE.DOC file has not be changed.



            3.2.4  Author index file

       Starting with  this release, we distribute a file that contains an index
       of the authors (and on-line experts) referenced in the PROSITE.DOC file.
       The name of this file is 'PAUTINDX.TXT'.




    <PAGE>



                                 WE NEED YOUR HELP !

       We welcome  feedback from our users. We would especially appreciate that
       you notify  us if  you find  that sequences  belonging to  your field of
       expertise are  missing from  the data  bank. We  also would  like to  be
       notified about  annotations to be updated, if, for example, the function
       of a protein has been clarified or if new post-translational information
       has become available.

















































    <PAGE>


                             APPENDIX A: SOME STATISTICS



       A.1  Amino acid composition


            A.1.1  Composition in percent for the complete data bank

       Ala (A) 7.60   Gln (Q) 4.03   Leu (L) 9.21   Ser (S) 7.15
       Arg (R) 5.23   Glu (E) 6.27   Lys (K) 5.83   Thr (T) 5.82
       Asn (N) 4.47   Gly (G) 6.97   Met (M) 2.36   Trp (W) 1.29
       Asp (D) 5.28   His (H) 2.25   Phe (F) 4.00   Tyr (Y) 3.21
       Cys (C) 1.78   Ile (I) 5.58   Pro (P) 5.02   Val (V) 6.52

       Asx (B) 0.005  Glx (Z) 0.005  Xaa (X) 0.02


            A.1.2  Classification of the amino acids by their frequency

       Leu, Ala, Ser, Gly, Val, Glu, Lys, Thr, Ile, Asp, Arg, Pro, Asn, Gln,
       Phe, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp



       A.2  Repartition of the sequences by their organism of origin

       Total number of species represented in this release of SWISS-PROT: 4471


            A.2.1 Table of the frequency of occurrence of species


            Species represented 1x: 2010
                                2x:  735
                                3x:  402
                                4x:  255
                                5x:  182
                                6x:  196
                                7x:  102
                                8x:   79
                                9x:   88
                               10x:   45
                           11- 20x:  176
                           21- 50x:  121
                           51-100x:   37
                             >100x:   43











    <PAGE>




            A.2.2  Table of the most represented species

        Number   Frequency          Species
             1        2862          Human
             2        2674          Escherichia coli
             3        1951          Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
             4        1697          Mouse
             5        1565          Rat
             6         710          Bovine
             7         679          Caenorhabditis elegans
             8         633          Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
             9         563          Bacillus subtilis
            10         542          Chicken
            11         410          African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis)
            12         394          Salmonella typhimurium
            13         387          Rabbit
            14         339          Pig
            15         251          Vaccinia virus (strain Copenhagen)
            16         239          Maize
            17         229          Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse-ear cress)
            18         221          Fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
            19         200          Bacteriophage T4
            20         198          Slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum)
            21         197          Rice
            22         193          Human cytomegalovirus (strain AD169)
            23         185          Pseudomonas aeruginosa
            24         183          Vaccinia virus (strain WR)
            25         180          Tobacco
            26         174          Pea
            27         168          Wheat
            28         158          Barley
            29         146          Variola virus
            30         142          Dog
            31         139          Sheep
            32         137          Soybean
            33         134          Staphylococcus aureus
            34         131          Spinach
            35         127          Pseudomonas putida
            36         124          Neurospora crassa
            37         122          Marchantia polymorpha (Liverwort)
            38         121          Rhodobacter capsulatus
            39         119          Klebsiella pneumoniae
            40         111          Agrobacterium tumefaciens
            41         108          Bacillus stearothermophilus
            42         104          Tomato
            43         101          Rhizobium meliloti









    <PAGE>




       A.3  Repartition of the sequences by size

                   From   To  Number             From   To   Number
                      1-  50    2159             1001-1100      363
                     51- 100    3748             1101-1200      257
                    101- 150    5182             1201-1300      196
                    151- 200    3711             1301-1400      115
                    201- 250    3240             1401-1500      113
                    251- 300    2860             1501-1600       54
                    301- 350    2687             1601-1700       55
                    351- 400    2771             1701-1800       45
                    401- 450    2065             1801-1900       51
                    451- 500    2192             1901-2000       37
                    501- 550    1560             2001-2100       19
                    551- 600    1089             2101-2200       48
                    601- 650     776             2201-2300       53
                    651- 700     580             2301-2400       19
                    701- 750     558             2401-2500       25
                    751- 800     425             >2500          119
                    801- 850     328
                    851- 900     353
                    901- 950     229
                    951-1000     221


       Currently the ten longest sequences are:

                                HTS1_COCCA  5217 a.a.
                                 FAT_DROME  5147 a.a.
                                RYNR_RABIT  5037 a.a.
                                RYNR_HUMAN  5032 a.a.
                                RYNC_RABIT  4969 a.a.
                                DYHC_DICDI  4725 a.a.
                                APB_HUMAN   4563 a.a.
                                APOA_HUMAN  4548 a.a.
                                RRPA_CVMJH  4488 a.a.
                                DYHC_TRIGR  4466 a.a.



















    <PAGE>



               APPENDIX B: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN BIOMOLECULAR DATABASES

       The current  status of the relationships (cross-references) between some
       biomolecular databases is shown in the following schematic:

                                                           **********************
                            ***********************        * EPD [Euk. Promot.] *
                            *  EMBL Nucleotide    * <----> **********************
                            *  Sequence Data      *
    ******************      *  Library            *        **********************
    * FLYBASE        * <--> *********************** <----- * ECD [E. coli map]  *
    * [Drosophila    *                ^   ^  ^             **********************
    * genomic d.b.]  * <---------+    |   |  |
    ******************           |    |   |  +------------ **********************
                                 |    |   |                * TFD [Trans. fact.] *
                                 |    |   |                **********************
    ******************           |    |   |
    * MaizeDb        * <------+  |    |   |                **********************
    ******************        |  |    |   +--------------> * GCRDb [7TM recep.] *
                              |  |    |   |                **********************
    ******************        |  |    |   |
    * WormPep        *        |  |    |   |                **********************
    * [C.elegans]    * <----+ |  |    |   |       +------> * DictyDB [D.disco.] *
    ******************      | |  |    |   |       |        **********************
                            | |  |    |   |       |
    ******************      | v  v    v   v       v        **********************
    * REBASE         *      ***********************        * ENZYME [Nomencl.]  *
    * [Restriction   * <--- *  SWISS-PROT         * <----- **********************
    *  enzymes]      *      *  Protein Sequence   *            |
    ******************      *  Data Bank          *            v
                            ***********************        **********************
    ******************       ^  ^  |  |  ^   ^  |          * OMIM   [Diseases]  *
    * EcoGene/EcoSeq *       |  |  |  |  |   |  +--------> **********************
    * [E. coli]      * <-----+  |  |  |  |   |
    ******************          |  |  |  |   +-----------> **********************
                                |  |  |  |                 * ECO2DBASE     [2D] *
                                |  |  |  |                 **********************
    ******************          |  |  |  |
    * PROSITE        * <--------+  |  |  +---------------> **********************
    * [Patterns]     *             |  |                    * SWISS-2DPAGE  [2D] *
    ******************             |  +---------------+    **********************
                 |                 v                  |
                 |          ***********************   |    **********************
                 +--------> * PDB [3D structures] *   +--> * Aarhus/Ghent  [2D] *
                            ***********************        **********************












    <PAGE>
      
