---
title: Swiss-Prot release 31.0
categories: sp-major
---

                        SWISS-PROT RELEASE 31.0 RELEASE NOTES


                                   1. INTRODUCTION

       1.1  Evolution

       Release 31.0  of SWISS-PROT  contains 43470 sequence entries, comprising
       15'335'248 amino acids abstracted from 39750 references. This represents
       an increase  of 8.3% over release 30. The recent growth of the data bank
       is summarized below.

       Release    Date   Number of entries     Nb of amino acids

       2.0        09/86               3939               900 163
       3.0        11/86               4160               969 641
       4.0        04/87               4387             1 036 010
       5.0        09/87               5205             1 327 683
       6.0        01/88               6102             1 653 982
       7.0        04/88               6821             1 885 771
       8.0        08/88               7724             2 224 465
       9.0        11/88               8702             2 498 140
       10.0       03/89              10008             2 952 613
       11.0       07/89              10856             3 265 966
       12.0       10/89              12305             3 797 482
       13.0       01/90              13837             4 347 336
       14.0       04/90              15409             4 914 264
       15.0       08/90              16941             5 486 399
       16.0       11/90              18364             5 986 949
       17.0       02/91              20024             6 524 504
       18.0       05/91              20772             6 792 034
       19.0       08/91              21795             7 173 785
       20.0       11/91              22654             7 500 130
       21.0       03/92              23742             7 866 596
       22.0       05/92              25044             8 375 696
       23.0       08/92              26706             9 011 391
       24.0       12/92              28154             9 545 427
       25.0       04/93              29955            10 214 020
       26.0       07/93              31808            10 875 091
       27.0       10/93              33329            11 484 420
       28.0       02/94              36000            12 496 420
       29.0       06/94              38303            13 464 008
       30.0       10/94              40292            14 147 368
       31.0       02/95              43470            15 335 248


          2. DESCRIPTION OF THE CHANGES MADE TO SWISS-PROT SINCE RELEASE 30

       2.1  Sequences and annotations

       About 3243 sequences have been added since release 30, the sequence data
       of 493  existing entries  has been  updated and  the annotations of 6729
       entries have been revised.






    <PAGE>



       2.2  What's happening with the model organisms

       As we  announced in  the last four releases we have selected a number of
       organisms that  are the  target  of  genome  sequencing  and/or  mapping
       projects and for which we intend to:

       -  Be as  complete as  possible. All sequences available at a given time
          should be  immediately included  in SWISS-PROT.  This  also  includes
          sequence corrections and updates;
       -  Provide a higher level of annotation;
       -  Provide cross-references  to specialized  database(s)  that  contain,
          among other  data, some genetic information about the genes that code
          for these proteins;
       -  Provide specific indices or documents.

       What was  done since  the last  release or  in preparation  for the next
       release:

       -  We have added four species to the list of model organisms:

            Salmonella typhimurium. We added all the missing publicly available
            protein sequences  from this  species and  we cross-referenced  the
            Salmonella sequences  to the  StyGene database  from Ken  Rudd (see
            section 2.3.2).  A new  documentation file (SALTY.TXT) is available
            (see section  2.4) that list all the Salmonella typhimurium entries
            linked to StyGene.

            Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Fission yeast). For this organism we are
            looking for  a genomic  database to  which the  relevant SWISS-PROT
            entries can  be linked. In this release we have added a significant
            number of  S.pombe sequences.  A new documentation file (POMBE.TXT)
            is   available    (see   section    2.4)   that    list   all   the
            Schizosaccharomyces pombe entries and their gene designation(s).

            Arabidopsis thaliana  (Mouse-ear cress). As of this release we have
            not yet  cross-linked the entries originating from this organism to
            a specific  genomic database  nor have  we yet  made a  significant
            effort to  enter all the Arabidopsis entries in SWISS-PROT. Such an
            effort is planned for the next release.

            Sulfolobus solfataricus.  This archebacteria  is the  target  of  a
            genomic project carried out at the Dalhousie University in Halifax,
            Canada. It is expected that data originating from this project will
            be available very soon. In preparation for this development we have
            already entered  in SWISS-PROT  all  the  available  S.solfataricus
            sequences that are publicly available.

       -  SWISS-PROT is  now cross-referenced  to  the  Bacillus  subtilis  168
          SubtiList database  designed by  Ivan Moszer of the Pasteur Institute
          in Paris  (see section 2.3.3). We now have in SWISS-PROT, 100% of the
          publicly available  protein sequences  referenced in SubtiList. A new
          documentation file (SUBTILIS.TXT) is available (see section 2.4) that
          list all the Bacillus subtilis entries linked to SubtiList.




    <PAGE>



       -  SWISS-PROT is  now  cross-referenced  to  the  yeast  LISTA  database
          designed by  Patrick Linder  of the University of Geneva (see section
          2.3.1). We  have worked together to insure that the gene name used in
          LISTA always  correspond to the first one (if more than one gene name
          exist)  listed   in  the  relevant  SWISS-PROT  entry.  All  proteins
          referenced in  LISTA are  now in  SWISS-PROT. We  also made  a  major
          effort to  integrate in  this release  all the new sequence data from
          the complete  sequences  of  chromosomes  I,  V,  VIII  and  IX.  New
          documentations files are available for each of these chromosomes (see
          section 2.4).


       Here is the current status of the model organisms:

       Organism        Database                    Index file       Number of
                       cross-referenced                             sequences
       --------------  --------------------------  --------------   ---------
       A.thaliana      None yet                    In preparation         271
       B.subtilis      SubtiList                   SUBTILIS.TXT          1083
       C.elegans       WormPep                     CELEGANS.TXT           690
       D.discoideum    DictyDB                     DICTY.TXT              199
       D.melanogaster  FlyBase                     In preparation         711
       E.coli          EcoGene                     ECOLI.TXT             3151
       H.sapiens       MIM                         MIMTOSP.TXT           3067
       S.cerevisiae    LISTA                       YEAST.TXT             3144
       S.typhimurium   StyGene                     SALTY.TXT              568
       S.pombe         None yet                    POMBE.TXT              279
       S.solfataricus  None yet                    None yet                58


            Other relevant information

       We apologizes  for running  behind with  new sequencing data from the C.
       elegans genomic  project. Starting  with the  next release, we will have
       implemented a  mechanism to  insure that data from the genome project is
       directly fed into the SWISS-PROT annotation 'pipeline'.

       With the  help of the group of Elizabeth Kutter from the Evergreen State
       College, we  have revised  and added  protein sequence  entries from the
       completed genome  of phage  T4. The next release will incorporate all of
       the data  from the complete genome of the Autographa californica nuclear
       polyhedrosis virus.


       2.3  Changes in the DR line

       In this  release, we have added cross-references from SWISS-PROT to five
       additional databases.  These cross-references  are  present  in  the  DR
       lines.

            2.3.1  LISTA

       The LISTA  database of  budding yeast  (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)  genes
       coding for  proteins prepared  under the supervisation of Patrick Linder



    <PAGE>



       at the University of Geneva (See: Doelz R., Mosse M.-O., Slonimski P.P.,
       Bairoch A., and Linder P.; Nucleic Acids Res. (1994), 22:3459-3461).


       Data bank identifier:    LISTA
       Primary identifier  :    Unique identifier  attributed by  LISTA to  the
                                gene coding for the protein
       Secondary identifier:    The gene designation (name)
       Example             :    DR   LISTA; SC00018; ACT1.


            2.3.2  StyGene

       The  StyGene   section  of   the  StySeq/StyMap   integrated  Salmonella
       typhimurium LT2  database, both  prepared by  Ken Rudd  at the  National
       Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).

       Data bank identifier:    STYGENE
       Primary identifier  :    Unique identifier  attributed by StyGene to the
                                gene coding for the protein
       Secondary identifier:    The gene designation (name)
       Example             :    DR   STYGENE; SG10312; PROV.


            2.3.3  SubtiList

       The SubtiList  relational database  for the Bacillus subtilis 168 genome
       prepared under the supervisation of Ivan Moszer at the Pasteur Institute
       (See Moszer I., Glaser P., and Danchin A.; Microbiol. (1995), In press).

       Data bank identifier:    SUBTILIST
       Primary identifier  :    Unique identifier  attributed by  SubtiList  to
                                the gene coding for the protein
       Secondary identifier:    The gene designation (name)
       Example             :    DR   SUBTILIST; BG10774; OPPD.


            2.3.4  HSSP

       The database  of Homology-derived Secondary Structure of Proteins (HSSP)
       prepared under  the supervisation  of Chris  Sander at  the  EMBL  (See:
       Sander C., and Schneider R.; Nucleic Acids Res. (1993), 21:3105-3109).

       Data bank identifier:    HSSP
       Primary identifier  :    Accession number  of a  SWISS-PROT entry cross-
                                referenced to  a PDB  entry  whose structure is
                                expected to be  similar to that of the entry in
                                which the HSSP cross-reference is present
       Secondary identifier:    Entry name of the PDB structure related to that
                                of the entry in  which the HSSP cross-reference
                                is present
       Example             :    DR   HSSP; P00438; 1DOB.





    <PAGE>



            2.3.5  Transfac

       The  transcription   factor  database   (Transfac)  developed  by  Edgar
       Wingender   and    Rainer   Knueppel    from   the   Gesellschaft   fuer
       Biotechnologische Forschung mbH in Braunschweig.

       Data bank identifier:    TRANSFAC
       Primary identifier  :    Unique identifier  (accession  number)  of  the
                                Tranfac entry
       Secondary identifier:    None; a dash '-' is stored in that field
       Example             :    DR   TRANSFAC; T00141; -.


       2.4  Status of the documentation files

       SWISS-PROT is  distributed with  a large  number of documentation files.
       Some of  these files  have been  available for  a long  time  (the  user
       manual, release  notes, the  various  indices  for  authors,  citations,
       keywords, etc.),  but  many  have  been  created  recently  and  we  are
       continuously  adding  new  files.  The  following  table  list  all  the
       documents that are currently available or that will be added in the next
       few months.

       USERMAN .TXT   User manual
       RELNOTES.TXT   Release notes
       SHORTDES.TXT   Short description of entries in SWISS-PROT

       JOURLIST.TXT   List of abbreviations for journals cited
       KEYWLIST.TXT   List of keywords in use
       SPECLIST.TXT   List of organism identification codes
       EXPERTS .TXT   List of on-line experts for PROSITE and SWISS-PROT

       ACINDEX .TXT   Accession number index
       AUTINDEX.TXT   Author index
       CITINDEX.TXT   Citation index
       KEYINDEX.TXT   Keyword index
       SPEINDEX.TXT   Species index

       7TMRLIST.TXT   List of 7-transmembrane G-linked receptors entries
       CDLIST  .TXT   CD nomenclature for surface proteins of human leucocytes
       CELEGANS.TXT   Index  of   Caenorhabditis  elegans   entries  and  their
                      corresponding  gene    designations  and  WormPep  cross-
                      references
       DICTY   .TXT   Index  of  Dictyostelium  discoideum  entries  and  their
                      corresponding   gene  designations  and   DictyDB  cross-
                      references
       EC2DTOSP.TXT   Index of  Escherichia coli  Gene-protein database entries
                      referenced in SWISS-PROT
       ECOLI   .TXT   Index of  Escherichia coli  K12 chromosomal  entries  and
                      their corresponding EcoGene cross-reference
       EMBLTOSP.TXT   Index of EMBL Database entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
       EXTRADOM.TXT   Nomenclature of extracellular domains





    <PAGE>



       GLYCOSYL.TXT   Index of  glycosyl hydrolases  classified by  families on
                      the basis of sequence similarities [2]
       HOXLIST .TXT   Vertebrate homeobox proteins: nomenclature and index
       HUMCHR21.TXT   Index  of  protein  sequence  entries  encoded  on  human
                      chromosome 21 [1]
       HUMCHRY .TXT   Index  of  protein  sequence  entries  encoded  on  human
                      chromosome Y [1]
       MIMTOSP .TXT   Index of MIM entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
       NOMLIST .TXT   List of nomenclature related references for proteins
       PDBTOSP .TXT   Index of Brookhaven PDB entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
       PLASTID .TXT   List of chloroplast and cyanelle encoded proteins
       POMBE   .TXT   Index of  Schizosaccharomyces pombe entries in SWISS-PROT
                      and their corresponding gene designations [1]
       RESTRIC .TXT   List of restriction enzymes and methylases entries
       RIBOSOMP.TXT   Index of ribosomal proteins classified by families on the
                      basis of sequence similarities [2]
       SALTY   .TXT   Index of  Salmonella typhimurium  LT2 chromosomal entries
                      and their corresponding StyGene cross-references [1]
       SUBTILIS.TXT   Index of  Bacillus subtilis  168 chromosomal  entries and
                      their corresponding SubtiList cross-references [1]
       YEAST   .TXT   Index  of  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  entries  and  their
                      corresponding gene designations
       YEAST1  .TXT   Yeast Chromosome I entries [1]
       YEAST2  .TXT   Yeast Chromosome II entries
       YEAST3  .TXT   Yeast Chromosome III entries
       YEAST5  .TXT   Yeast Chromosome V entries [1]
       YEAST8  .TXT   Yeast Chromosome VIII entries [1]
       YEAST9  .TXT   Yeast Chromosome IX entries [1]
       YEAST11 .TXT   Yeast Chromosome XI entries

       Notes:

       [1]  New in release 31.
       [2]  Will be available starting with release 32 in June 1995.


       2.5  The Expasy World-Wide Web server

            2.5.1 Background information

       The World-Wide Web (WWW), which originated at CERN, is a powerful global
       information  system   merging  networked   information   retrieval   and
       hypertext. It  gives access, using hypertext links, to the documents and
       information contained  in all the existing WWW servers around the world,
       as well  as to  the data  obtainable through other information retrieval
       systems like WAIS, Gopher, X500, etc. To access a WWW server, one has to
       run on a local computer a client program (a WWW browser), which displays
       hypertext documents.  The user  can then either request a keyword search
       or jump  to another  document by following a hypertext link. WWW has the
       outstanding advantage  of extending  the hypertext  model to  the  whole
       world (by allowing hypertext jumps to documents anywhere on the internet
       network) and  by being  device and  user-interface independent (browsers
       exist for  a variety  of computers  and user-interfaces,  including Unix




    <PAGE>



       workstations  running  XWindows,  MacIntoshes  and  PCs  with  Microsoft
       Windows).

       The ExPASy  WWW server  allows access, using the user-friendly hypertext
       model, to  the SWISS-PROT,  PROSITE,  ENZYME,  SWISS-2DPAGE  and  SWISS-
       3DIMAGE databases and, through any SWISS-PROT protein sequence entry, to
       other  databases   such  as   EMBL,  REBASE,  FlyBase,  GCRDb,  MaizeDB,
       SubtiList, OMIM,  PDB, HSSP,  YEPD and Medline. Using a browser which is
       able to  display images  one can also remotely access 2D gels image data
       from SWISS-2DPAGE.

       A WWW  server can  be accessed  on  the  internet  through  its  Uniform
       Resource Locator  (URL), the addressing system defined by the WWW model.
       The URL for the ExPASy WWW server is:

                               http://expasy.hcuge.ch/
       or
                                http://129.195.254.61/

       To access a WWW server, you need to run a browser (or client) program on
       your local computer. Browsers exist for a variety of machines and may be
       obtained by  anonymous ftp. ExPASy can be used with any WWW browser, but
       we recommend  either NCSA  Mosaic or  Netscape Navigator.  Both are very
       flexible and powerful browsers with a graphical user interface; they are
       available for  Unix boxes  using X11/Motif; for Apple McIntoshes and for
       Microsoft Windows. You can get them from various FTP sites, for example:

          ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu (for Mosaic)
          ftp1.netscape.com (for Netscape)

       For more  information on  the  ExPASy  WWW  server,  you  can  read  the
       following article:

          Appel R.D., Bairoch A., Hochstrasser D.F.
          A new  generation of  information retrieval tools for biologists: the
          example of the ExPASy WWW server.
          Trends Biochem. Sci. 19:258-260(1994).

       Or you can contact Dr. Ron Appel:

          Email: appel@cih.hcuge.ch
          Fax: +41-22-372 61 98


            2.5.2 SWISS-SHOP

       Thanks to the work of Manuel Peitsch from the Geneva Glaxo Institute for
       Molecular Biology,  we can  provide, on ExPASy, an important new service
       called SWISS-SHOP. SWISS-Shop allows any users of SWISS-PROT to indicate
       what proteins  he/she is  interested in.  This can be done using various
       criteria that can be combined:

       -  By entering  one  or  more  words  that  should  be  present  in  the
          description line;



    <PAGE>



       -  By entering one or more species name(s) or taxonomic division(s);
       -  By entering one or more keywords;
       -  By entering one or more author names;
       -  By entering the accession number (or entry name) of a PROSITE pattern
          or a user-defined sequence pattern;
       -  By entering  the accession  number (or  entry name)  of  an  existing
          SWISS-PROT entry or by entering a "private" sequence.

       Every week,  the new  sequences entered  in SWISS-PROT are automatically
       compared with all the criteria that have been defined by the users. If a
       sequence corresponds  to the  selection criteria defined by a user, that
       sequence is sent by electronic mail.


            2.5.3 What else is new on ExPASy

       Since the  last release,  there has been a number of new developments on
       the ExPASy WWW server. Here are some highlights of these changes:

       -  Access to  the ENZYME data bank has been fully implemented in ExPASy.
          Many different  access options  are allowed.  Hypertext links between
          ENZYME and  SWISS-PROT, PROSITE, MIM and the Japanese Ligand database
          are available.

       -  WWW  links   have  been  implemented  between  SWISS-PROT  and  HSSP,
          SubtiList, and YEPD.

       -  Cross-references from  SWISS-PROT to Flybase now use the links to the
          new server for that database (at Harvard).

       -  The  page   giving  access  to  the  SWISS-PROT  documents  has  been
          completely updated.  A new  page allows  access to  all  of  the  old
          release notes.


       2.6  Important forthcoming change

       In the next release, the RM (Reference Medline) line will be replaced by
       a more 'generic' line called RX (Reference cross-references). The format
       of that line will be:

       RX   bibliographic_database_name; identifier.

       As of the next release, the only "bibliographic_database_name" that will
       be used  will be  "MEDLINE" and the associated "identifier" is the eight
       digit  Medline  Unique  Identifier  (UID).  But  it  is  'rumored'  that
       additional bibliographic  databases are  interested to  be linked to the
       sequence databases.

       Example:

       RM   91002678





    <PAGE>



       will be changed to:

       RX   MEDLINE; 91002678.


       2.7  Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT

       Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT are available by anonymous FTP. Three files
       are updated at each update:

       new_seq.dat    Contains all the new entries since the last full release.
       upd_seq.dat    Contains the entries for which the sequence data has been
                      updated since the last release.
       upd_ann.dat    Contains the  entries for  which one  or more  annotation
                      fields have been updated since
                      the last release.

       Currently these  files are  available on  the  following  anonymous  ftp
       servers:

       Organization   ExPASy (Geneva University Expert Protein Analysis System)
       Address        expasy.hcuge.ch  (or 129.195.254.61)
       Directory      /databases/swiss-prot/updates

       Organization   National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
       Address        ncbi.nlm.nih.gov (or 130.14.20.1)
       Directory      /repository/swiss-prot/updates

       Organization   European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
       Address        ftp.ebi.ac.uk (or 193.62.196.6)
       Directory      /pub/databases/swissprot/new

       !! Important notes !!!

       Although we  try to  follow a  regular schedule,  we do  not promise  to
       update these  files every  week. In some cases two weeks will elapse in-
       between two updates.

       Due to  the current  mechanism used  to build a release the entries that
       are provided in these updates are not guaranteed to be error free. Also,
       for the  same reason,  new  entries  do  not  contain  an  OC  (Organism
       Classification) line.



                                3. ENZYME AND PROSITE

       3.1  The ENZYME data bank

       Release 18.0  of the  ENZYME data bank is distributed with release 31 of
       SWISS-PROT. ENZYME  release 18.0  contains information  relative to 3546
       enzymes.





    <PAGE>



       In this release we have added cross-references from the ENZYME data bank
       to the PROSITE data bank document entries that mention specific types of
       enzymes. These  lines are  present in  a new line type (PR) whose format
       is:

       PR   PROSITE; PSITE_DOC_AC_NB

       where 'PSITE_DOC_AC_NB'  is a  PROSITE document  entry accession number.
       Example:

       PR   PROSITE; PDOC00065;


       3.2  The PROSITE data bank

       Release 12.2  of the PROSITE data bank is distributed with release 30 of
       SWISS-PROT.  Release  12.2  contains  785  documentation  chapters  that
       describes 1029  different patterns, rules and profiles/matrices. Release
       12.2 does  not really  represent a new release; the only changes between
       releases 12.1  and 12.2  are updating  of the pointers to the SWISS-PROT
       entries whose  name have  been modified between  releases 30 and 31. The
       next release  of PROSITE  (13.0) will  be distributed with release 32 of
       SWISS-PROT.




                                 WE NEED YOUR HELP !

       We welcome  feedback from our users. We would especially appreciate that
       you notify  us if  you find  that sequences  belonging to  your field of
       expertise are  missing from  the data  bank. We  also would  like to  be
       notified about  annotations to be updated, if, for example, the function
       of a protein has been clarified or if new post-translational information
       has become available.






















    <PAGE>



                             APPENDIX A: SOME STATISTICS



       A.1  Amino acid composition

            A.1.1  Composition in percent for the complete data bank

       Ala (A) 7.57   Gln (Q) 4.02   Leu (L) 9.24   Ser (S) 7.19
       Arg (R) 5.21   Glu (E) 6.29   Lys (K) 5.88   Thr (T) 5.80
       Asn (N) 4.50   Gly (G) 6.91   Met (M) 2.36   Trp (W) 1.28
       Asp (D) 5.30   His (H) 2.24   Phe (F) 4.02   Tyr (Y) 3.21
       Cys (C) 1.73   Ile (I) 5.64   Pro (P) 4.98   Val (V) 6.51

       Asx (B) 0.002  Glx (Z) 0.002  Xaa (X) 0.02


            A.1.2  Classification of the amino acids by their frequency

       Leu, Ala, Ser, Gly, Val, Glu, Lys, Thr, Ile, Asp, Arg, Pro, Asn, Gln,
       Phe, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp



       A.2  Repartition of the sequences by their organism of origin

       Total number of species represented in this release of SWISS-PROT: 4714

            A.2.1 Table of the frequency of occurrence of species

            Species represented 1x: 2139
                                2x:  756
                                3x:  426
                                4x:  264
                                5x:  191
                                6x:  191
                                7x:  117
                                8x:   80
                                9x:  102
                               10x:   46
                           11- 20x:  185
                           21- 50x:  128
                           51-100x:   43
                             >100x:   45













    <PAGE>



            A.2.2  Table of the most represented species

        Number   Frequency          Species
             1        3151          Escherichia coli
             2        3144          Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
             3        3067          Human
             4        1843          Mouse
             5        1683          Rat
             6        1083          Bacillus subtilis
             7         735          Bovine
             8         711          Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
             9         690          Caenorhabditis elegans
            10         573          Chicken
            11         568          Salmonella typhimurium
            12         449          African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis)
            13         403          Rabbit
            14         357          Pig
            15         279          Fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
            16         275          Bacteriophage T4
            17         271          Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse-ear cress)
            18         258          Maize
            19         251          Vaccinia virus (strain Copenhagen)
            20         219          Rice
            21         214          Pseudomonas aeruginosa
            22         199          Slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum)
            23         195          Tobacco
            24         193          Human cytomegalovirus (strain AD169)
            25         183          Vaccinia virus (strain WR)
            26         180          Pea
            27         173          Wheat
            28         168          Barley
            29         154          Staphylococcus aureus
            30         153          Dog
            31         151          Marchantia polymorpha (Liverwort)
                       151          Neurospora crassa
            33         147          Soybean
            34         146          Variola virus
            35         144          Pseudomonas putida
                       144          Rhodobacter capsulatus
            37         141          Sheep
            38         135          Spinach
            39         131          Klebsiella pneumoniae
            40         120          Bacillus stearothermophilus
            41         117          Tomato
            42         116          Agrobacterium tumefaciens
            43         111          Potato
            44         107          Rhizobium meliloti
            45         102          Lactococcus lactis (subsp. lactis)









    <PAGE>



       A.3  Repartition of the sequences by size

                   From   To  Number             From   To   Number
                      1-  50    2381             1001-1100      404
                     51- 100    4198             1101-1200      292
                    101- 150    5781             1201-1300      214
                    151- 200    4200             1301-1400      140
                    201- 250    3732             1401-1500      127
                    251- 300    3303             1501-1600       70
                    301- 350    3099             1601-1700       57
                    351- 400    3136             1701-1800       52
                    401- 450    2365             1801-1900       58
                    451- 500    2477             1901-2000       38
                    501- 550    1775             2001-2100       21
                    551- 600    1247             2101-2200       51
                    601- 650     898             2201-2300       55
                    651- 700     682             2301-2400       22
                    701- 750     629             2401-2500       26
                    751- 800     497             >2500          132
                    801- 850     375
                    851- 900     405
                    901- 950     281
                    951-1000     250


       A.4  Longest sequences

       The longest sequences (>=4000 residues) are listed here:

                                   HTS1_COCCA  5217
                                   FAT_DROME   5147
                                   RYNR_RABIT  5037
                                   RYNR_HUMAN  5032
                                   RYNC_RABIT  4969
                                   DYHC_DICDI  4725
                                   DYHC_RAT    4644
                                   DYHC_DROME  4639
                                   APB_HUMAN   4563
                                   APOA_HUMAN  4548
                                   RRPA_CVMJH  4488
                                   DYHC_TRIGR  4466
                                   DYHC_ANTCR  4466
                                   GRSB_BACBR  4451
                                   PKSK_BACSU  4447
                                   PKSL_BACSU  4427
                                   PLEC_RAT    4140
                                   DYHC_YEAST  4092
                                   RRPA_CVH22  4085









    <PAGE>



       A.5  List of the most cited journals in SWISS-PROT

       Citations            Journal abbreviation

       4517                 J. BIOL. CHEM.
       3097                 NUCLEIC ACIDS RES.
       2886                 PROC. NATL. ACAD. SCI. U.S.A.
       1869                 J. BACTERIOL.
       1571                 FEBS LETT.
       1543                 GENE
       1454                 EUR. J. BIOCHEM.
       1313                 EMBO J.
       1263                 NATURE
       1215                 BIOCHEM. BIOPHYS. RES. COMMUN.
       1183                 BIOCHEMISTRY
        933                 J. MOL. BIOL.
        931                 BIOCHIM. BIOPHYS. ACTA
        914                 CELL
        860                 MOL. CELL. BIOL.
        738                 MOL. GEN. GENET.
        689                 VIROLOGY
        650                 BIOCHEM. J.
        647                 PLANT MOL. BIOL.
        566                 SCIENCE
        539                 J. BIOCHEM.
        509                 MOL. MICROBIOL.
        443                 J. VIROL.
        392                 J. GEN. VIROL.
        284                 J. CELL BIOL.
        264                 GENOMICS
        253                 GENES DEV.
        249                 BIOL. CHEM. HOPPE-SEYLER
        229                 CURR. GENET.
        218                 ARCH. BIOCHEM. BIOPHYS.
        214                 YEAST
        213                 HOPPE-SEYLER'S Z. PHYSIOL. CHEM.
        212                 J. IMMUNOL.
        190                 MOL. BIOCHEM. PARASITOL.
        184                 J. GEN. MICROBIOL.
        173                 MOL. ENDOCRINOL.
        164                 INFECT. IMMUN.
        156                 J. CLIN. INVEST.
        149                 ONCOGENE
        143                 PLANT PHYSIOL.
        142                 DNA
        137                 FEMS MICROBIOL. LETT.
        132                 HUM. MOL. GENET.
        129                 J. EXP. MED.
        120                 AM. J. HUM. GENET.
        117                 J. MOL. EVOL.
        111                 GENETICS
        102                 BLOOD
        101                 AGRIC. BIOL. CHEM.




    <PAGE>


               APPENDIX B: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN BIOMOLECULAR DATABASES

       The current  status of the relationships (cross-references) between some
       biomolecular databases is shown in the following schematic:

                             ***********************
    ******************       *  EMBL Nucleotide    *       **********************
    * EPD [Euk.Prom] * <---> *  Sequence Data      * <---- * ECD [E. coli map]  *
    ******************       *  Library      [EBI] *       **********************
                             ***********************
                              ^  ^ ^  ^  ^  ^  ^
    ******************        |  | |  I  |  |  |
    * FlyBase        * <------+  | |  I  |  |  |           **********************
    ******************        |  | |  I  |  |  +---------> * GCRDb [7TM recep.] *
                              |  | |  I  |  |  |           **********************
    ******************        |  | |  I  |  |  |
    * SubtiList      * <---------+ |  I  |  |  |           **********************
    ******************        |  | |  I  |  +------------> * EcoGene [E.coli]   *
                              |  | |  I  |  |  |           **********************
    ******************        |  | |  I  |  |  |
    * MaizeDb        * <-----------+  I  |  |  |           **********************
    ******************        |  | |  I  +---------------> * LISTA (Yeast)      *
                              |  | |  I  |  |  |           **********************
    ******************        |  | |  I  |  |  |
    * WormPep        *        |  | |  I  |  |  |           **********************
    * [C.elegans]    * <----+ |  | |  I  |  |  |  +------> * DictyDB [D.disco.] *
    ******************      | |  | |  I  |  |  |  |        **********************
                            | |  | |  I  |  |  |  |
    ******************      | v  v v  v  v  v  v  v        **********************
    * REBASE         *      ***********************        * ENZYME [Nomencl.]  *
    * [Restriction   * <--- *  SWISS-PROT         * <----- **********************
    *  enzymes]      *      *  Protein Sequence   *            |
    ******************      *  Data Bank          *            v
                            ***********************        **********************
    ******************      ^ ^ ^  ^ ^  ^ | ^ ^ |          * OMIM   [Diseases]  *
    * StyGene        *      | | |  | |  | | | | +--------> **********************
    * [S.Typhimurium]* <----+ | |  | |  | | | |
    ******************        | |  | |  | | | |            **********************
                              | |  | |  | | | +----------> * ECO2DBASE     [2D] *
    ******************        | |  | |  | | |              **********************
    * Transfac       * <------+ |  | |  | | |
    ******************          |  | |  | | |              **********************
                                |  | |  | | +------------> * SWISS-2DPAGE  [2D] *
    ******************          |  | |  | |                **********************
    * PROSITE        * <--------+  | |  | |
    * [Patterns]     *             | |  | |                **********************
    ******************             | |  | +--------------> * Aarhus/Ghent  [2D] *
                 |                 | |  |                  **********************
                 |                 | |  |
                 |                 | |  +----------------> **********************
                 |                 | |                     * YEPD (Yeast)  [2D] *
                 |                 | +-----------------+   **********************
                 |                 v                   |
                 |          ***********************    +-> **********************
                 +--------> * PDB [3D structures] * <----- * HSSP (3D simil.)   *
                            ***********************        **********************


    <PAGE>
      
