---
title: TrEMBL release 1.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 1996-10-02
categories: tr-major
---

    First release of TREMBL, a protein sequence database supplementing
    the SWISS-PROT Protein Sequence Data Bank


    INTRODUCTION
    ============

    TREMBL is a protein sequence database supplementing the SWISS-PROT Protein
    Sequence Data Bank. TREMBL contains the translations of all coding
    sequences (CDS) present in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database not yet
    integrated in SWISS-PROT. TREMBL can be considered as a preliminary
    section of SWISS-PROT. For all TREMBL entries which should finally be
    upgraded to the standard SWISS-PROT quality, SWISS-PROT accession numbers
    have been assigned.


    FIRST RELEASE OF TREMBL
    =======================

    This TREMBL release is created from the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database
    release 48 and contains 104'962 sequence entries, comprising 28'063'108
    amino acids. TREMBL release 1 will be distributed with SWISS-PROT release 34.


    TREMBL is split in two main sections; SP-TREMBL and REM-TREMBL:

    SP-TREMBL (SWISS-PROT TREMBL) contains the entries (86'040) which should be
    incorporated into SWISS-PROT. SWISS-PROT accession numbers have been assigned
    for all SP-TREMBL entries.

    SP-TREMBL is organized in subsections:

    fun.dat (Fungi):                3367 entries
    hum.dat (Human):                4322 entries
    inv.dat (Invertebrates):       11920 entries
    mam.dat (Other Mammals):        1768 entries
    mhc.dat (MHC proteins):         2050 entries
    org.dat (Organelles):           6285 entries
    phg.dat (Bacteriophages):        866 entries
    pln.dat (Plants):               5524 entries
    pro.dat (Prokaryotes):         17222 entries
    rod.dat (Rodents):              4573 entries
    vrl.dat (Viruses):             26042 entries
    vrt.dat (Other Vertebrates):    2101 entries


    REM-TREMBL (REMaining TREMBL) contains the entries (19'255) that we do
    not want to include in SWISS-PROT.


    ACCESS/DATA DISTRIBUTION
    ========================

    FTP server:     ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl
    SRS server:     http://www.ebi.ac.uk/srs/srsc

    TREMBL is also available on the SWISS-PROT CD-ROM.
    SP-TREMBL will be searchable on the FASTA and BLITZ servers of the EBI.



    TREMBL HAS BEEN PREPARED BY:
    ============================

    Rolf Apweiler, Alain Gateau, Vivien Junker, Stephanie Kappus, Fiona Lang,
    Nicoletta Mitaritonna and Claire O'Donovan at the EMBL Outstation - European
    Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) in Hinxton, UK;
    Amos Bairoch at the Medical Biochemistry Department of the University
    of Geneva, Switzerland.


    =======================================================================
    Rolf Apweiler                           | SWISS-PROT Coordinator
    EMBL Outstation                         | Email:apweiler@ebi.ac.uk
    European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) | URL:  http://www.ebi.ac.uk
    Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton   | Tel:  +44 (1223) 494435
    Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK                  | Fax:  +44 (1223) 494968
    ========================================================================
      
