---
title: Swiss-Prot release 35.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 1997-11-01
categories: sp-major
---

                       SWISS-PROT RELEASE 35.0 RELEASE NOTES

                       1.  INTRODUCTION

     Release 35.0 of SWISS-PROT contains  69'113 sequence entries, comprising
     25'083'768  amino   acids  abstracted   from  59'101   references.  This
     represents an increase of 18.3% over release  34. The growth of the data
     bank is summarized below.

     Release      Date           Number of       Number of amino
                                   entries                 acids
        2.0       09/86               3939               900 163
        3.0       11/86               4160               969 641
        4.0       04/87               4387             1 036 010
        5.0       09/87               5205             1 327 683
        6.0       01/88               6102             1 653 982
        7.0       04/88               6821             1 885 771
        8.0       08/88               7724             2 224 465
        9.0       11/88               8702             2 498 140
       10.0       03/89              10008             2 952 613
       11.0       07/89              10856             3 265 966
       12.0       10/89              12305             3 797 482
       13.0       01/90              13837             4 347 336
       14.0       04/90              15409             4 914 264
       15.0       08/90              16941             5 486 399
       16.0       11/90              18364             5 986 949
       17.0       02/91              20024             6 524 504
       18.0       05/91              20772             6 792 034
       19.0       08/91              21795             7 173 785
       20.0       11/91              22654             7 500 130
       21.0       03/92              23742             7 866 596
       22.0       05/92              25044             8 375 696
       23.0       08/92              26706             9 011 391
       24.0       12/92              28154             9 545 427
       25.0       04/93              29955            10 214 020
       26.0       07/93              31808            10 875 091
       27.0       10/93              33329            11 484 420
       28.0       02/94              36000            12 496 420
       29.0       06/94              38303            13 464 008
       30.0       10/94              40292            14 147 368
       31.0       02/95              43470            15 335 248
       32.0       11/95              49340            17 385 503
       33.0       02/96              52205            18 531 384
       34.0       10/96              59021            21 210 389
       35.0       11/97              69113            25 083 768



         2.  DESCRIPTION OF THE CHANGES MADE TO SWISS-PROT SINCE RELEASE 34

     2.1  Sequences and annotations

     10'189 sequences have been added since  release 34, the sequence data of
     1654 existing entries  has been  updated and  the annotations  of 15'683
     entries have been revised.


     2.2  What's happening with the model organisms

     We have selected  a number of  organisms that  are the  target of genome
     sequencing and/or mapping projects and for which we intend to:

     . Be as complete  as possible. All  sequences available at  a given time
       should be  immediately  included  in  SWISS-PROT.  This also  includes
       sequence corrections and updates;
     . Provide a higher level of annotation;
     . Provide cross-references  to  specialized  database(s)  that  contain,
       among other data, some  genetic information about the  genes that code
       for these proteins;
     . Provide specific indices or documents.

     What was done  since the  last release  or in  preparation for  the next
     release concerning model organisms:

     . We  have   added   Methanoccocus   jannaschii,   Helicobacter  pylori,
       Synechocystis PCC 6803 to  the list of model  organisms. The genome of
       these organisms has been completely sequenced  and we plan to annotate
       them fully  in SWISS-PROT.  Specific  documents have  been  added (see
       section 4) for each of these organisms.

     . We also  have  added  mouse (Mus  musculus)  as  a  model  organism. A
       significant effort has been done to  add new mouse sequences (542 have
       been added since the  last release); we  have added links  to MGD (the
       Mouse Genome Database;  see section  2.4) and we  also have  created a
       specific  document  (MGDTOSP.TXT)  that   lists  the  cross-references
       between MGD and SWISS-PROT.

     . We have  continued  our effort  in  catching up  with  the  backlog of
       sequences from  other  model  organisms. In  particular  we  added 410
       entries from  yeast,  644  from  human,  89  from  S.pombe,  527  from
       C.elegans, 95 from A.thaliana and 92 from D.melanogaster.

     . We have added  in SWISS-PROT all  the sequences  from yeast chromosome
       XIII. We plan  to integrate data  from the  remaining chromosomes (IV,
       XII, XV and XVI) very soon  so as to have a  complete set of annotated
       yeast sequences.

     . We have finished the annotation of all Mycoplasma genitalium entries.

     . We plan  to  finish  as quickly  as  possible  the  annotation  of the
       Escherichia coli and Haemophilus influenzae sequence entries which are
       not yet part of SWISS-PROT.

     Here is the current status of the model organisms in SWISS-PROT:

     Organism        Database            Index file       Number of
                     cross-referenced                     sequences
     --------------  ----------------    --------------   ---------
     A.thaliana      None yet            In preparation         658
     B.subtilis      SubtiList           SUBTILIS.TXT          1882
     C.albicans      None yet            CALBICAN.TXT           167
     C.elegans       Wormpep             CELEGANS.TXT          1735
     D.discoideum    DictyDB             DICTY.TXT              272
     D.melanogaster  FlyBase             FLY.TXT               1002
     E.coli          EcoGene             ECOLI.TXT             4098
     H.influenzae    HiDB (TIGR)         HAEINFLU.TXT          1687
     H.sapiens       MIM                 MIMTOSP.TXT           4644
     H.pylori        HpDB (TIGR)         HPYLORI.TXT            257
     M.genitalium    MgDB (TIGR)         MGENITAL.TXT           470
     M.musculus      MGD                 MGDTOSP.TXT           2971
     M.jannaschii    MjDB (TIGR)         MJANNASC.TXT          1064
     M.tuberculosis  None yet            None yet               796
     S.cerevisiae    SGD                 YEAST.TXT             4750
     S.typhimurium   StyGene             SALTY.TXT              680
     S.pombe         None yet            POMBE.TXT             1045
     S.solfataricus  None yet            None yet                42


     Collectively the entries from the above  model organisms represent 35.4%
     of all SWISS-PROT entries.


     2.3  Changes affecting the accession numbers

     With the creation of the  TrEMBL database (see section  6) and the rapid
     increase in the amount of sequence data, we  are faced with a problem of
     availability of accession numbers. Currently we  use a system based on a
     one-letter prefix followed by 5 digits. This system was also used by the
     nucleotide sequence databases  which had originally  reserved for SWISS-
     PROT the prefix letters 'P' and 'Q'. The nucleotide databases having run
     out of space (due  mainly to EST's), have  been forced to  start using a
     new format based on a two-letter prefix followed by 6 digits.

     We have  used up  all possible  numbers with  'P' and  'Q' and  the only
     letter prefix which was not  used by the nucleotide  database is 'O'. As
     we believe that  changing the  format of the  accession numbers  to that
     used now by the  nucleotide database would create  havoc on the numerous
     software packages using SWISS-PROT, we have  decided to keep a system of
     accession numbers based on a six-character  code, but with the following
     changes:

     1)   We have  started  using 'O'.  This  extra letter  should  allow the
     continuation of  the present  format (1  prefix letter  + 5  digits) for
     approximately one year.
     2)   When we will have finished using up 'O', we will introduce a system
     based on the following format:

          1        2       3          4            5            6
         [O,P,Q]  [0-9]  [A-Z, 0-9]  [A-Z, 0-9]   [A-Z, 0-9]   [0-9]

     What the above means is that we will keep a six-character code, but that
     in positions 3,  4 and  5 of this  code any  combination of  letters and
     numbers can  be  present.  This format  allows  a  total  of  14 million
     accession numbers (up from 300'000 with the current system).

     We only  allow numbers  in  positions 2  and  6 so  that  the SWISS-PROT
     accession numbers can not  be mistaken with gene  names, acronyms, other
     type of accession numbers or any type of words!

     Examples: P0A3S2, Q2ASD4, O13YX2, P9B123


     2.4  Introduction of a new CC line-type topic (DATABASE)

     There are an  increasing number of  databases that cater  for a specific
     protein or  a for  a  very limited  number  of proteins.  Most  of these
     databases are mutation databases, reporting defects  linked to a genetic
     disease. We want  to add cross-references  to these  databases when they
     are available  electronically, either  by WWW  or  by FTP.  We therefore
     added in this release, a new comments (CC) line-type 'topic': "DATABASE"
     whose syntax is the following:

      CC   -!- DATABASE: NAME=Text[; NOTE=Text][; WWW="Address"][;
              FTP="Address"].

     Where
     `NAME' is the name of the database;
     `NOTE' (optional) is a free text note;
     `WWW'  (optional) is the WWW address (URL) of the database;
     `FTP'  (optional) is the  anonymous FTP address (including the directory
            name) where the database file(s) are stored.

     Examples of its usage:

     CC   -!- DATABASE: NAME=CD40Lbase;
     CC       NOTE=European CD40L defect database (mutation db);
     CC       WWW="http://www.expasy.ch/www/cd40lbase.html";
     CC       FTP="ftp://www.expasy.ch/databases/cd40lbase".

     CC   -!- DATABASE: NAME=PROW; NOTE=CD guide CD80 entry;
     CC       WWW="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/prow/cd/cd80.htm".

     Please note that this topic along  with some forms of  the DR lines (see
     next section)  are  the first  occurrence  in SWISS-PROT  of  lower case
     characters (yes, we plan to go to mixed cases soon!).

     It is also,  currently, the  only part of  SWISS-PROT where  line longer
     than 75 characters can  be found as we  do not reformat long  URL or FTP
     addresses.


     2.5  Changes concerning cross-references (DR line)

     2.5.1  TIGR

     We have added cross-references  from SWISS-PROT to the  TIGR database, a
     collection  of  genomic  databases  for  microbes,  plants  and  animals
     maintained by The  Institute for  Genomic Research (TIGR)  in Rockville,
     Maryland, USA. These cross-references are present in the DR lines:

     Data bank identifier : TIGR
     Primary identifier   : The genome Open Reading Frame (ORF) code
     Secondary identifier : Not defined, a dash ("-") is stored in that field
     Example              : DR   TIGR; HP1563; -.


     2.5.2  MGD

     We have  added  cross-references  from SWISS-PROT  to  the  Mouse Genome
     Database (MGD),  maintained by  The  Jackson Laboratory  in  Bar Harbor,
     Maine, USA. These cross-references are present in the DR lines:

     Data bank identifier : MGD
     Primary identifier   : The accession number
     Secondary identifier : The gene designation
     Example              : DR   MGD; MGI :109323; HTR2B.


     2.5.3  LISTA

     We have  removed  the  cross-references  from  SWISS-PROT  to the  LISTA
     database which is no longer maintained  and which has been superseded by
     the SGD database to which SWISS-PROT is fully cross-referenced.


     2.5.4  PROSITE

     The format for cross-references to the PROSITE protein domain and family
     database used to be:

     DR   PROSITE; ACCESSION_NUMBER; ENTRY_NAME.

     It has been changed to:

     DR   PROSITE; ACCESSION_NUMBER; ENTRY_NAME; STATUS.

     Where 'ACCESSION_NUMBER' stands for the accession  number of the PROSITE
     pattern or  profile entry;  "ENTRY_NAME" is  the name  of the  entry and
     `STATUS' is one of the following:

     n
     FALSE_NEG
     PARTIAL
     UNKNOWN_n

     Where "n"  is the  number of  hits  of the  pattern or  profile  in that
     particular protein sequence. The "FALSE_NEG" status indicates that while
     the pattern or  profile did  not detect  the protein  sequence, it  is a
     member of  that  particular  family  or  domain.  The  "PARTIAL"  status
     indicates that  the  pattern  or profile  did  not  detect  the sequence
     because that sequence is not  complete and lacks the  region on which is
     based  the  pattern/profile.  Finally  the  "UNKNOWN"  status  indicates
     uncertainties as to the fact that the sequence is a member of the family
     or domain described by the pattern/profile.

     Example of PROSITE cross-references:

     DR   PROSITE; PS00107; PROTEIN_KINASE_ATP; 1.
     DR   PROSITE; PS00028; ZINC_FINGER_C2H2; 6.
     DR   PROSITE; PS00237; G_PROTEIN_RECEPTOR; FALSE_NEG.
     DR   PROSITE; PS01128; SHIKIMATE_KINASE; PARTIAL.


     2.5.5  REBASE

     Two small changes  have been made  to the syntax  of cross-references to
     the REBASE database:

     - REBASE has recently changed its accession numbers to add an additional
       digit (an extra leading zero).
     - We are  now using  mixed case  characters in the  secondary identifier
       (the name  of the restriction system)  so as to  represent exactly the
       information as stored in REBASE.

     Example:

     DR   REBASE; RB0005; ECORI.

     has been changed to:

     DR   REBASE; RB00005; EcoRI.



                      3. PLANNED CHANGES

     3.1  Extension of the accession number system

     As already explained in  detail under 2.3, we  will extend the accession
     number system when  we will  have used  up the  'O' series  of accession
     numbers. This can be anticipated for October 1998.


     3.2  Switch to the NCBI taxonomy

     To standardize the taxonomies used by different databases we will change
     with release 37 our taxonomy. We will switch to the NCBI taxonomy, which
     is  already  used  as  the  common  taxonomy  by  the  DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank
     nucleotide sequence databases.


     3.3  Introduction of RT lines

     With release 37  we will introduce  a new  line type,  the RT (Reference
     Title) line. This  optional line will  be placed  between the  RA and RL
     line. The  RT line  gives the  title  of the  paper (or  other  work) as
     exactly as possible given the limitations of the computer character set.
     The form which will  be used is that  which would be used  in a citation
     rather than displayed at  the top of the  published paper. For instance,
     where journals capitalize major  title words this is  not preserved. The
     title is enclosed  in double quotes,  and may be  continued over several
     lines as necessary.  The title lines  are terminated by  a semicolon. An
     example of the use of RT lines is shown below:

     RT   "Sequence analysis of the genome of the unicellular cyanobacterium
     RT   Synechocystis sp. strain PCC6803. I. Sequence features in the 1 Mb
     RT   region from map positions 64% to 92% of the genome.";



                      4. STATUS OF THE DOCUMENTATION FILES

     SWISS-PROT is distributed  with a  large number of  documentation files.
     Some of  these files  have  been available  for  a long  time  (the user
     manual, release  notes,  the  various  indices  for authors,  citations,
     keywords, etc.),  but  many  have  been  created  recently  and  we  are
     continuously adding new  files. Since release  34, we have  added 15 new
     document files.  The following table lists  all  the documents  that are
     currently available.

     USERMAN.TXT    User manual
     RELNOTES.TXT   Release notes
     SHORTDES.TXT   Short description of entries in SWISS-PROT
     JOURLIST.TXT   List of abbreviations for journals cited
     KEYWLIST.TXT   List of keywords in use
     SPECLIST.TXT   List of organism identification codes
     TISSLIST.TXT   List of tissues
     EXPERTS.TXT    List of on-line experts for PROSITE and SWISS-PROT
     SUBMIT.TXT     Submission of sequence data to SWISS-PROT

     ACINDEX.TXT    Accession number index
     AUTINDEX.TXT   Author index
     CITINDEX.TXT   Citation index
     KEYINDEX.TXT   Keyword index
     SPEINDEX.TXT   Species index
     DELETEAC.TXT   Deleted accession number index [1]

     7TMRLIST.TXT   List of 7-transmembrane G-linked receptors entries
     AATRNASY.TXT   List of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
     ALLERGEN.TXT   Nomenclature and index of allergen sequences
     BLOODGRP.TXT   List of blood group antigen proteins [1]
     CALBICAN.TXT   Index   of  Candida  albicans  entries   and  their
                    corresponding gene designations
     CDLIST.TXT     CD  nomenclature  for  surface  proteins  of  human
                    leucocytes
     CELEGANS.TXT   Index  of Caenorhabditis elegans entries  and their
                    corresponding gene Wormpep cross-references
     DICTY.TXT      Index   of  Dictyostelium  discoideum  entries  and
                    their  corresponding gene designations  and DictyDb
                    cross-references
     EC2DTOSP.TXT   Index  of  Escherichia coli  Gene-protein  database
                    entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     ECOLI.TXT      Index  of Escherichia coli K12  chromosomal entries
                    and their corresponding EcoGene cross-references
     EMBLTOSP.TXT   Index  of   EMBL  Database  entries  referenced  in
                    SWISS-PROT
     EXTRADOM.TXT   Nomenclature of extracellular domains
     FLY.TXT        Index  of  Drosophila  entries and  FlyBase  cross-
                    references [1]
     GLYCOSID.TXT   Classification  of glycosyl hydrolase  families and
                    index of glycosyl hydrolase entries
     HAEINFLU.TXT   Index  of  Haemophilus  influenzae  RD  chromosomal
                    entries
     HOXLIST.TXT    Vertebrate  homeotic Hox proteins: nomenclature and
                    index
     HPYLORI.TXT    Index   of   Helicobacter   pylori   strain   26695
                    chromosomal entries [1]
     HUMCHR18.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 18 [1]
     HUMCHR19.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 19 [1]
     HUMCHR20.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 20
     HUMCHR21.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 21
     HUMCHR22.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 22
     HUMCHRX.TXT    Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome X
     HUMCHRY.TXT    Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome Y
     INITFACT.TXT   List and index of translation initiation factors [1]
     MIMTOSP.TXT    Index of MIM entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     METALLO.TXT    Classification  of  metallothioneins and  index  of
                    entries in SWISS-PROT [1]
     MGDTOSP.TXT    Index of MGD entries referenced in SWISS-PROT [1]
     MGENITAL.TXT   Index  of Mycoplasma genitalium chromosomal entries
                    [1]
     MJANNASC.TXT   Index of Methanococcus jannaschii entries [1]
     NGR234.TXT     Table  of   putative  genes  in  Rhizobium  plasmid
                    pNGR234a [1]
     NOMLIST.TXT    List   of  nomenclature   related  references   for
                    proteins
     PCC6803.TXT    Index of Synechocystis strain PCC 6803 entries [1]
     PDBTOSP.TXT    Index  of X-ray  crystallography Protein Data  Bank
                    (PDB) entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     PEPTIDAS.TXT   Classification  of peptidase families and  index of
                    peptidase entries
     PLASTID.TXT    List of chloroplast and cyanelle encoded proteins
     POMBE.TXT      Index   of  Schizosaccharomyces  pombe  entries  in
                    SWISS-PROT    and    their    corresponding    gene
                    designations
     RESTRIC.TXT    List of restriction enzyme and methylase entries
     RIBOSOMP.TXT   Index of  ribosomal proteins classified by families
                    on the basis of sequence similarities
     SALTY.TXT      Index  of  Salmonella typhimurium  LT2  chromosomal
                    entries  and  their  corresponding  StyGene  cross-
                    references
     SUBTILIS.TXT   Index of  Bacillus subtilis 168 chromosomal entries
                    and their corresponding SubtiList cross-references
     UPFLIST.TXT    UPF  (Uncharacterized  Protein Families)  list  and
                    index of members [1]
     YEAST.TXT      Index   of  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  entries  and
                    their corresponding gene designations
     YEAST1.TXT     Yeast Chromosome I entries
     YEAST2.TXT     Yeast Chromosome II entries
     YEAST3.TXT     Yeast Chromosome III entries
     YEAST5.TXT     Yeast Chromosome V entries
     YEAST6.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VI entries
     YEAST7.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VII entries
     YEAST8.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VIII entries
     YEAST9.TXT     Yeast Chromosome IX entries
     YEAST10.TXT    Yeast Chromosome X entries
     YEAST11.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XI entries
     YEAST13.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XIII entries [1]
     YEAST14.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XIV entries

     Notes:
     [1]  New in release 35.

     We have  continued  to include  in  some SWISS-PROT  document  files the
     references of  World-Wide  Web  sites  relevant  to  the  subject  under
     consideration. There are now 12 documents that include such links.



                      5. THE EXPASY WORLD-WIDE WEB SERVER

     5.1  Background information

     The most  efficient and  user-friendly  way to  browse  interactively in
     SWISS-PROT, PROSITE, ENZYME, SWISS-2DPAGE and other databases. is to use
     the World-Wide  Web (WWW)  molecular biology  server ExPASy.  The ExPASy
     server was  made  available  to the  public in  September  1993,  it  is
     reachable at the following address:

                                  http://www.expasy.ch/

     The ExPASy WWW server  allows access, using  the user-friendly hypertext
     model, to the  SWISS-PROT, PROSITE,  ENZYME, SWISS-2DPAGE, SWISS-3DIMAGE
     and CD40Lbase  databases and,  through any  SWISS-PROT  protein sequence
     entry, to  other databases  such  as EMBL,  Eco2DBASE,  EcoCyc, FlyBase,
     GCRDb, MaizeDB, SubtiList/NRSub,  OMIM, PDB, HSSP,  ProDom, REBASE, SGD,
     YEPD and  Medline. ExPAsy  also offers  many tools  for the  analysis of
     protein sequences and 2D gels.


     5.2  SWISS-SHOP

     We provide, on  ExPASy, a  service called SWISS-SHOP.  SWISS-Shop allows
     any users of SWISS-PROT  to indicate what proteins  he/she is interested
     in. This can be done using various criteria that can be combined:

     -    By entering  one  or  more words  that  should  be  present  in the
          description line;
     -    By entering one or more species name(s) or taxonomic division(s);
     -    By entering one or more keywords;
     -    By entering one or more author names;
     -    By entering  the  accession number  (or  entry name)  of  a PROSITE
          pattern or a user-defined sequence pattern;
     -    By entering the  accession number  (or entry  name) of  an existing
          SWISS-PROT entry or by entering a "private" sequence.

     Every week, the  new sequences  entered in SWISS-PROT  are automatically
     compared with all the criteria that have been defined by the users. If a
     sequence corresponds to the  selection criteria defined by  a user, that
     sequence is sent by electronic mail.


     5.3  What is new on ExPASy

     ExPASy is constantly modified  and improved. If you  wish to be informed
     on the changes made to the server you can either:

     -    Read  the  document  "History  of  changes,  improvements  and  new
          features" which is available at the address:

                  http://www.expasy.ch/www/history.html

     -    Subscribe to SWISS-Flash, a service that reports news of databases,
          software and services developments. By subscribing to this service,
          you will  automatically  get  SWISS-Flash  bulletins  by electronic
          mail. To subscribe use the address:

                  http://www.expasy.ch/www/swiss-flash.html



                      6. TREMBL - A SUPPLEMENT TO SWISS-PROT

     The ongoing  genome sequencing  and mapping  projects  have dramatically
     increased the number of protein sequences to be incorporated into SWISS-
     PROT. Since we do not want to dilute the quality standards of SWISS-PROT
     by incorporating  sequences into  the database  without  proper sequence
     analysis and annotation,  we cannot  speed up  the incorporation  of new
     incoming data indefinitely.  But as we  also want to  make the sequences
     available as  fast as  possible, we  have  introduced with  SWISS-PROT a
     computer annotated supplement.  This supplement  consists of  entries in
     SWISS-PROT-like format  derived  from  the  translation  of  all  coding
     sequences (CDS) in the  EMBL nucleotide sequence  database, except those
     already included in SWISS-PROT.

     We name  this  supplement  TrEMBL (Translation  from  EMBL).  It  can be
     considered as  a  preliminary  section  of  SWISS-PROT. This  SWISS-PROT
     release is supplemented by TrEMBL release 5. TrEMBL is split in two main
     sections; SP-TrEMBL and REM-TrEMBL:

     - SP-TrEMBL (SWISS-PROT TrEMBL) contains the entries (140'555 in release
       5) which should  be incorporated into SWISS-PROT. SWISS-PROT accession
       numbers have been assigned for all SP-TrEMBL entries.

     - REM-TrEMBL (REMaining TrEMBL) contains  the entries (25'806 in release
       5) that  we do not want to include  in  SWISS-PROT  for  a  variety of
       reasons (synthetic  sequences,  pseudogenes, translations of uncorrect
       open reading frames,  fragments  with  less  than eight  amino  acids,
       patent-derived sequences, immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors, etc.)

     TrEMBL is available  by FTP from  the EBI server  (ftp.ebi.ac.uk) in the
     directory '/pub/databases/trembl'. It can  be queried on WWW  by the EBI
     SRS server (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/). It  is also available  on the SWISS-
     PROT CD-ROM and is searchable on the  FASTA, BIC_SW and BLAST servers of
     the EBI.



                      7. WEEKLY UPDATES OF SWISS-PROT

     Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT are available by anonymous FTP. Three files
     are updated at each update:

     new_seq.dat    Contains all the new entries since the last full release;
     upd_seq.dat    Contains the entries for which the sequence data has been
                    updated since the last release;
     upd_ann.dat    Contains  the entries  for which  one or  more annotation
                    fields have been updated since the last release.

     Currently these  files  are  available on  the  following  anonymous FTP
     servers:

     Organization   ExPASy (Geneva University Expert Protein Analysis System)
     Address        expasy.hcuge.ch  (or 129.195.254.61)
     Directory      /databases/swiss-prot/updates

     Organization   European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
     Address        ftp.ebi.ac.uk (or 193.62.196.6)
     Directory      /pub/databases/swissprot/new


     !! Important notes !!!

     - Although we  try to follow  a regular schedule,  we do  not promise to
       update these files every week. In some cases two weeks will elapse in-
       between two updates.
     - Due to the current mechanism used  to build a release the entries that
       are provided in these updates are not guaranteed to be error free.



                      8.  ENZYME and PROSITE

     8.1  The ENZYME data bank

     Release 22.0 of the ENZYME  data bank is distributed  with release 35 of
     SWISS-PROT. ENZYME release  22.0 contains  information relative  to 3651
     enzymes.


     8.2  The PROSITE data bank

     Release 14.0 of the PROSITE data bank  is distributed with release 35 of
     SWISS-PROT. This release  of PROSITE contains  997 documentation entries
     that describe  1'335  different patterns,  rules  and profiles/matrices.
     Release 14.0  is  the  first completely  new  release  of  PROSITE since
     November 1995. Since  that date we  have added 114  entries and modified
     566 entries. The long time that  elapsed between this release of PROSITE
     and the  last  one is  partially  due  to a  complete  rewriting  of the
     software  tools  that  maintain  the  database  and  allows  it  be  bi-
     directionally inked to SWISS-PROT. Thanks to  those changes, we will now
     be able to  produce PROSITE releases  at each release  of SWISS-PROT and
     also to offer on the ExPASy server frequent updates of the database.



                      9. WE NEED YOUR HELP !

     We welcome feedback from our users.  We would especially appreciate that
     you notify us  if you  find that  sequences belonging  to your  field of
     expertise are  missing from  the data  bank. We  also  would like  to be
     notified about annotations to be updated,  if, for example, the function
     of a protein has been clarified or if new post-translational information
     has become  available. To  facilitate such  feedback's  we offer  on the
     ExPASY WWW server  a form that  allows the submission  of updates and/or
     corrections to SWISS-PROT:

                   http://www.expasy.ch/sprot/sp_update_form.html

     It is also  possible, from  any entries in  SWISS-PROT displayed  by the
     ExPASy server, to submit updates and/or  corrections for that particular
     entry. Finally, you  can also send  your comments by  electronic mail to
     the address:

                                swiss-prot@expasy.ch


     ========================================================================


                             APPENDIX A: SOME STATISTICS


       A.1  Amino acid composition

            A.1.1  Composition in percent for the complete data bank

       Ala (A) 7.57   Gln (Q) 4.00   Leu (L) 9.39   Ser (S) 7.15
       Arg (R) 5.15   Glu (E) 6.34   Lys (K) 5.95   Thr (T) 5.70
       Asn (N) 4.50   Gly (G) 6.83   Met (M) 2.35   Trp (W) 1.24
       Asp (D) 5.29   His (H) 2.23   Phe (F) 4.08   Tyr (Y) 3.18
       Cys (C) 1.68   Ile (I) 5.78   Pro (P) 4.91   Val (V) 6.55

       Asx (B) 0.001  Glx (Z) 0.001  Xaa (X) 0.01


            A.1.2  Classification of the amino acids by their frequency

       Leu, Ala, Ser, Gly, Val, Glu, Lys, Ile, Thr, Asp, Arg, Pro, Asn, Phe,
       Gln, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp



       A.2  Repartition of the sequences by their organism of origin

       Total number of species represented in this release of SWISS-PROT: 5713

       The first twenty species represent 34020 sequences: 49.2 % of the total
       number of entries.


       A.2.1 Table of the frequency of occurrence of species

            Species represented 1x: 2609
                                2x:  891
                                3x:  480
                                4x:  321
                                5x:  225
                                6x:  209
                                7x:  148
                                8x:   94
                                9x:  113
                               10x:   58
                           11- 20x:  261
                           21- 50x:  165
                           51-100x:   64
                             >100x:   75


       A.2.2  Table of the most represented species

        Number   Frequency          Species
             1        4750          Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
             2        4644          Human
             3        4098          Escherichia coli
             4        2971          Mouse
             5        2398          Rat
             6        1882          Bacillus subtilis
             7        1735          Caenorhabditis elegans
             8        1687          Haemophilus influenzae
             9        1064          Methanococcus jannaschii
            10        1047          Bovine
            11        1045          Fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
            12        1002          Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
            13         799          Chicken
            14         786          Mycobacterium tuberculosis
            15         680          Salmonella typhimurium
            16         658          Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse-ear cress)
            17         648          African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis)
            18         551          Pig
            19         541          Rabbit
            20         494          Synechocystis sp. (strain PCC 6803)
            21         489          Mycoplasma pneumoniae
            22         470          Mycoplasma genitalium
            23         403          Rhizobium sp. (strain NGR234)
            24         398          Maize
            25         340          Pseudomonas aeruginosa
            26         292          Rice
            27         273          Bacteriophage T4
            28         272          Slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum)
            29         257          Helicobacter pylori
            30         256          Tobacco
            31         253          Vaccinia virus (strain Copenhagen)
            32         248          Dog
            33         231          Pea
            34         223          Sheep
            35         219          Porphyra purpurea
            36         209          Barley
            37         203          Neurospora crassa
            38         199          Wheat
                       199          Staphylococcus aureus
            40         196          Mycobacterium leprae
            41         193          Human cytomegalovirus (strain AD169)
            42         192          Soybean
            43         190          Klebsiella pneumoniae
            44         184          Vaccinia virus (strain WR)
            45         183          Rhodobacter capsulatus
                       183          Pseudomonas putida
            47         180          Bacillus stearothermophilus
            48         175          Potato
            49         174          Tomato
            50         167          Candida albicans
            51         162          Agrobacterium tumefaciens
            52         156          Spinach
            53         154          Rhizobium meliloti
                       154          Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus
            55         151          Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
            56         150          Marchantia polymorpha (Liverwort)
            57         149          Guinea pig
            58         146          Variola virus
            59         145          Cyanophora paradoxa
            60         139          Odontella sinensis
            61         138          Aspergillus nidulans
            62         134          Orgyia pseudotsugata multicapsid polyhedrosis virus
            63         132          Lactococcus lactis (subsp. lactis)
            64         131          Streptomyces coelicolor
            65         122          Thermus aquaticus (subsp. thermophilus)
            66         120          Horse
            67         116          Golden hamster
            68         113          Trypanosoma brucei brucei
                       113          Anabaena sp. (strain PCC 7120)
                       113          Synechococcus sp. (strain PCC 7942)
            71         108          Kluyveromyces lactis
            72         107          Bombyx mori (Silk moth)
            73         105          Bradyrhizobium japonicum
                       105          Alcaligenes eutrophus
            75         102          Yersinia enterocolitica



       A.3  Repartition of the sequences by size

                   From   To  Number             From   To   Number
                      1-  50    2882             1001-1100      627
                     51- 100    5886             1101-1200      484
                    101- 150    8453             1201-1300      339
                    151- 200    6661             1301-1400      226
                    201- 250    6184             1401-1500      186
                    251- 300    5742             1501-1600      115
                    301- 350    5369             1601-1700      102
                    351- 400    5392             1701-1800       79
                    401- 450    4149             1801-1900       86
                    451- 500    3905             1901-2000       52
                    501- 550    2927             2001-2100       30
                    551- 600    2053             2101-2200       67
                    601- 650    1560             2201-2300       64
                    651- 700    1159             2301-2400       32
                    701- 750    1032             2401-2500       39
                    751- 800     831             >2500          203
                    801- 850     652
                    851- 900     685
                    901- 950     464
                    951-1000     396



       A.4  Longest sequences

       The longest sequences (>=4000 residues) are listed here:

                                   HTS1_COCCA  5217
                                   MUC2_HUMAN  5179
                                   FAT_DROME   5147
                                   RYNR_RABIT  5037
                                   RYNR_PIG    5035
                                   RYNR_HUMAN  5032
                                   RYNC_RABIT  4969
                                   LRP_CAEEL   4753
                                   DYHC_DICDI  4725
                                   PLEC_RAT    4687
                                   LRP2_RAT    4660
                                   DYHC_RAT    4644
                                   DYHC_DROME  4639
                                   DYHC_CAEEL  4568
                                   DYHB_CHLRE  4568
                                   APB_HUMAN   4563
                                   APOA_HUMAN  4548
                                   LRP1_HUMAN  4544
                                   LRP1_CHICK  4543
                                   DYHC_PARTE  4540
                                   RRPA_CVMJH  4488
                                   DYHG_CHLRE  4485
                                   DYHC_ANTCR  4466
                                   DYHC_TRIGR  4466
                                   GRSB_BACBR  4451
                                   PKSK_BACSU  4447
                                   PKSL_BACSU  4427
                                   PGBM_HUMAN  4393
                                   YP73_CAEEL  4385
                                   DYHC_NEUCR  4367
                                   DYHC_NECHA  4349
                                   DYHC_EMENI  4344
                                   PKD1_HUMAN  4303
                                   DYHC_YEAST  4092
                                   RRPA_CVH22  4085


       A.5  Statistics for journal citations


       Total number of journals cited in this release of SWISS-PROT: 861


       A.5.1 Table of the frequency of journal citations

            Journals cited 1x: 326
                           2x: 117
                           3x:  61
                           4x:  39
                           5x:  30
                           6x:  23
                           7x:  14
                           8x:  13
                           9x:  10
                          10x:  12
                      11- 20x:  66
                      21- 50x:  58
                      51-100x:  23
                        >100x:  69


       A.5.2  List of the most cited journals in SWISS-PROT

       Citations       Journal abbreviation
       ---------       ----------------------------------
       6038            J. BIOL. CHEM.
       3672            PROC. NATL. ACAD. SCI. U.S.A.
       3356            NUCLEIC ACIDS RES.
       2604            J. BACTERIOL.
       2352            GENE
       1992            FEBS LETT.
       1853            EUR. J. BIOCHEM.
       1693            BIOCHEM. BIOPHYS. RES. COMMUN.
       1651            EMBO J.
       1596            BIOCHEMISTRY
       1540            NATURE
       1367            BIOCHIM. BIOPHYS. ACTA
       1244            J. MOL. BIOL.
       1177            CELL
       1137            MOL. CELL. BIOL.
        920            MOL. GEN. GENET.
        899            PLANT MOL. BIOL.
        850            BIOCHEM. J.
        764            SCIENCE
        750            VIROLOGY
        748            GENOMICS
        731            MOL. MICROBIOL.
        661            J. BIOCHEM.
        502            J. VIROL.
        444            J. CELL BIOL.
        439            YEAST
        435            J. GEN. VIROL.
        418            PLANT PHYSIOL.
        381            GENES DEV.
        333            HUM. MOL. GENET.
        323            J. IMMUNOL.
        313            CURR. GENET.
        305            ARCH. BIOCHEM. BIOPHYS.
        303            INFECT. IMMUN.
        287            ONCOGENE
        287            MOL. BIOCHEM. PARASITOL.
        262            BIOL. CHEM. HOPPE-SEYLER
        248            FEMS MICROBIOL. LETT.
        230            MOL. ENDOCRINOL.
        230            HUM. MUTAT.
        220            J. CLIN. INVEST.
        220            AM. J. HUM. GENET.
        219            NAT. GENET.
        219            DEVELOPMENT
        216            J. GEN. MICROBIOL.
        213            HOPPE-SEYLER'S Z. PHYSIOL. CHEM.
        194            J. MOL. EVOL.
        185            GENETICS
        180            STRUCTURE
        178            MICROBIOLOGY
        177            BLOOD
        172            HUM. GENET.
        169            DNA CELL BIOL.
        168            J. EXP. MED.
        163            APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.
        158            DEV. BIOL.
        156            NEURON
        152            DNA
        136            IMMUNOGENETICS
        124            ENDOCRINOLOGY
        123            DNA SEQ.
        122            PLANT CELL
        115            NAT. STRUCT. BIOL.
        109            HEMOGLOBIN
        108            PROTEIN SCI.
        108            BIOCHIMIE
        106            AGRIC. BIOL. CHEM.
        105            BIOORG. KHIM.
        101            CANCER RES.


     ===========================================================================


       APPENDIX B: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN SWISS-PROT AND SOME BIOMOLECULAR
                   DATABASES

       The current  status of  the relationships (cross-references) between
       SWISS-PROT and some biomolecular databases is shown in the following
       schematic:


                             ***********************
                             *  EMBL Nucleotide    *
                             *  Sequence Database  *
                             *       [EBI]         *
                             ***********************
                               ^ ^ ^  ^  ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * FlyBase        * <-------+ | |  I  | | | | +-------> * MGD [Mouse]        *
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
                               | | |  I  | | | | |
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * SubtiList      * <---------+ |  I  | | | +---------> * GCRDb [7TM recep.] *
    * [B.subtilis]   *         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |
                               | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************         | | |  I  | | +-----------> * EcoGene [E.coli]   *
    * Mendel [Plant] * <-----+ | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************       | | | |  I  | | | | |
                             | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************       | | | |  I  +---------------> * SGD [Yeast]        *
    * MaizeDb        * <-----------+  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * [Zea mays]     *       | | | |  I  | | | | |
    ******************       | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
                             | | | |  I  | +-------------> * DictyDB [D.disco.] *
    ******************       | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * WormPep        *       | | | |  I  | | | | |
    * [C.elegans]    * <---+ | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************     | | | | |  I  | | | | | +-----> * ENZYME [Nomencl.]  *
                           | | | | |  I  | | | | | |       **********************
    ******************     | v v v v  v  v v v v v v           v
    * REBASE         *     *************************       **********************
    * [Restriction   * <-- *   SWISS-PROT          * ----> * OMIM [Human]       *
    *  enzymes]      *     *   Protein Sequence    *       **********************
    ******************     *   Data Bank           *
                           *************************       **********************
    ******************      ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ | ^ ^ ^          * ECO2DBASE     [2D] *
    * StyGene        *      | | | | | | | | | | +--------> **********************
    * [S.Typhimurium]* <----+ | | | | | | | | |
    ******************        | | | | | | | | |            **********************
                              | | | | | | | | +----------> * Maize-2DPAGE  [2D] *
    ******************        | | | | | | | |              **********************
    * Transfac       * <------+ | | | | | | |
    ******************          | | | | | | |              **********************
                                | | | | | | +------------> * SWISS-2DPAGE  [2D] *
    ******************          | | | | | |                **********************
    * Harefield [2D] * <--------+ | | | | |
    ******************            | | | | |                **********************
                                  | | | | +--------------> * Aarhus/Ghent  [2D] *
    ******************            | | | |                  **********************
    * PROSITE        *            | | | |
    * [Patterns and  * <----------+ | | +----------------> **********************
    * profiles]      *              | |                    * YEPD [Yeast]  [2D] *
    ******************              | +----------------+   **********************
                 |                  v                  |
                 |          ***********************    +-> **********************
                 +--------> * PDB [3D structures] * <----- * HSSP [3D similar.] *
                            ***********************        **********************

     ===End=of=SWISS-PROT=release=35=notes=====================================
      
