---
title: TrEMBL release 4.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 1997-07-01
categories: tr-major
---

                                  TREMBL Release Notes
                                  Release 4, Jul 1997


        EMBL Outstation
        European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
        Wellcome Trust Genome Campus
        Hinxton
        Cambridge CB10 1SD
        United Kingdom

        Telephone: (+44 1223) 494 400
        Fax: (+44 1223) 494 468
        Electronic mail address: DATALIB@EBI.AC.UK
        WWW server: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/

        Amos Bairoch
        Medical Biochemistry Department
        Centre Medical Universitaire
        1211 Geneva 4
        Switzerland

        Telephone: (+41 22) 784 40 82
        Fax: (+41 22) 702 55 02
        Electronic mail address: BAIROCH@CMU.UNIGE.CH
        WWW server: http://expasy.hcuge.ch/

        Acknowledgements

        TREMBL has been prepared by:

        o  Rolf Apweiler, Sergio Contrino, Vivien Junker, Stephanie Kappus,
           Fiona Lang, Michele Magrane, Maria Jesus Martin, Nicoletta
           Mitaritonna and Claire O'Donovan at the EMBL Outstation - European
           Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) in Hinxton, UK;
        o  Amos Bairoch and Alain Gateau at the Medical Biochemistry Department
           of the University of Geneva, Switzerland.

        Notes

        This manual and the database it accompanies may be copied and
        redistributed freely, without advance permission, provided
        that this statement is reproduced with each copy.

        Citation

        If you  want to  cite  TREMBL  in  a  publication  please  use  the
        following reference:

                  Bairoch A., and Apweiler R.
                  The SWISS-PROT protein sequence data bank and its
                  supplement TREMBL.
                  Nucleic Acids Res. 25:31-26(1997).


                             1. Introduction


    TREMBL is a computer-annotated protein sequence database supplementing the
    SWISS-PROT Protein Sequence Data Bank. TREMBL contains the translations of
    all coding sequences (CDS) present in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database
    not yet integrated in SWISS-PROT. TREMBL can be considered as a preliminary
    section of SWISS-PROT. For all TREMBL entries which should finally be
    upgraded to the standard SWISS-PROT quality, SWISS-PROT accession numbers
    have been assigned.


                            2. Why a supplement to SWISS-PROT?

    The ongoing genome sequencing and mapping projects have dramatically
    increased the number of protein sequences to be incorporated into SWISS-PROT.
    We do not want to dilute the quality standards of SWISS-PROT by incorporating
    sequences without proper sequence analysis and annotation, but we do want to
    make the sequences available as fast as possible. TREMBL achieves this second
    goal, and is a major step in the process of speeding up subsequent
    upgrading of annotation to the standard SWISS-PROT quality.
    To address the problem of redundancy, the translations of all coding
    sequences (CDS) in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database already included
    in SWISS-PROT have been removed from TREMBL.

    We name this supplement TREMBL (TRanslation from EMBL), since the tools
    used to create the translations of the CDS are based on the program
    'trembl' written by Thure Etzold at the EMBL.


                                 3. The Release

    This TREMBL release is created from the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database
    release 51 and contains 139'208 sequence entries, comprising 37'836'288 amino
    acids. To minimize redundancy, the translations of all coding sequences (CDS)
    in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database already included in SWISS-PROT Release
    34 and in SWISS-PROT updates by 21.7. have been removed from TREMBL release 4.

    TREMBL is split in two main sections; SP-TREMBL and REM-TREMBL:

    SP-TREMBL (SWISS-PROT TREMBL) contains the entries (116'769) which should be
    eventually incorporated into SWISS-PROT. SWISS-PROT accession numbers have been
    assigned for all SP-TREMBL entries.

    SP-TREMBL is organized in subsections:

    fun.dat (Fungi):                3757 entries
    hum.dat (Human):                5605 entries
    inv.dat (Invertebrates):       15940 entries
    mam.dat (Other Mammals):        2081 entries
    mhc.dat (MHC proteins):         2694 entries
    org.dat (Organelles):           8213 entries
    phg.dat (Bacteriophages):        961 entries
    pln.dat (Plants):               7776 entries
    pro.dat (Prokaryotes):         26576 entries
    rod.dat (Rodents):              5551 entries
    unc.dat (Unclassified):          279 entries
    vrl.dat (Viruses):             34508 entries
    vrt.dat (Other Vertebrates):    2828 entries

    REM-TREMBL (REMaining TREMBL) contains the entries (22'439) that we do
    not want to include in SWISS-PROT.REM-TREMBL entries have no accession
    numbers. This section is organized in five subsections:

       1) Immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors
          Most REM-TREMBL entries will be immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors.
          We stopped entering  immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors into SWISS-
          PROT, because we only   want to  keep  the  germ  line  gene  derived
          translations of  these proteins  in  SWISS-PROT  and  not  all  known
          somatic recombinated  variations of  these proteins. We would like to
          create  a  specialized  database  dealing  with these sequences as  a
          further  supplement to  SWISS-PROT and  keep  only  a  representative
          cross-section of these proteins in SWISS-PROT.

       2) Synthetic sequences
          Another category of data which will not be included in SWISS-PROT are
          synthetic sequences.  Again, we do not want to leave these entries in
          TREMBL.  Ideally   one  should   build  a  specialized  database  for
          artificial sequences as a further supplement to SWISS-PROT.

       3) Patent application sequences
          A third  subsection consists  of coding sequences captured from patent
          applications. A thorough survey of these entries have shown that apart
          from a rather small  minority (which in  most cases  have already been
          integrated  in SWISS-PROT),  most of  these sequences  contains  either
          erroneous data or concern artificially generated sequences outside the
          scope of SWISS-PROT.

       4) Small fragments
          Another  subsection consists  of fragments with less than seven amino
          acids.

       5) CDS not coding for real proteins
          The last subsection consists of CDS translations where we have strong
          evidence to believe that these CDS are not coding for real proteins.



                    4. Format Differences Between SWISS-PROT and TREMBL

    The format and conventions used by TREMBL follow as closely as possible
    that of SWISS-PROT. Hence, it is not necessary to produce an additional
    user manual and extensive release notes for TREMBL. The information given
    in the SWISS-PROT release notes and user manual are in general valid for
    TREMBL. The differences are mentioned below.

    The general structure of an entry is identical in SWISS-PROT and TREMBL.
    The data class used in TREMBL (in the ID line) is always 'PRELIMINARY',
    whereas in SWISS-PROT it is always 'STANDARD'.

    Differences in line types present in SWISS-PROT and TREMBL:

    The ID line (IDentification):

    The entry name used in SP-TREMBL is the same as the Accession Number of the
    entry. The entry name used in REM-TREMBL is the PID tagged to the
    corresponding CDS in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database. 'PID' stands for
    the "Protein IDentification" number. It is a number that you will find in
    EMBL nucleotide sequence entries in a qualifier called "/db_xref" which is
    tagged to every CDS in the nucleotide database. Example:

       FT   CDS            54..1382
       FT                  /note="ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/
       FT                  oxygenase activase precursor"
       FT                  /db_xref="PID:g1006835"

    The DT line (DaTe)

    The format of the DT lines that serve to indicate when an entry was
    created and updated are identical to that defined in SWISS-PROT; but the
    DT lines in TREMBL are referring to the TREMBL release. The difference is
    shown in the example below.

        DT lines in a SWISS-PROT entry:

        DT   01-JAN-1988 (REL. 06, CREATED)
        DT   01-JUL-1989 (REL. 11, LAST SEQUENCE UPDATE)
        DT   01-AUG-1992 (REL. 23, LAST ANNOTATION UPDATE)

        DT lines in a TREMBL entry:

        DT   01-NOV-1996 (TREMBLREL. 01, CREATED)
        DT   01-NOV-1996 (TREMBLREL. 01, LAST SEQUENCE UPDATE)
        DT   01-FEB-1997 (TREMBLREL. 02, LAST ANNOTATION UPDATE)


                    5. Weekly updates of TREMBL

    Weekly cumulative updates of TREMBL are available by anonymous FTP and
    from the EBI SRS server.


                    6. Access/Data Distribution

    FTP server:     ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl
    SRS server:     http://srs.ebi.ac.uk:5000/

    TREMBL is also available on the SWISS-PROT CD-ROM.
    SP-TREMBL is searchable on the FASTA server of the EBI and will be soon
    searchable on the BLITZ server of the EBI.
      
