---
title: Swiss-Prot release 37.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 1998-12-01
categories: sp-major
---

                      SWISS-PROT RELEASE 37.0 RELEASE NOTES

    !! Important: do not forget to read section 10 of these release notes. It
    contains an important announcement relevant to SWISS-PROT and PROSITE !!



                               1.  INTRODUCTION


    Release 37.0  of SWISS-PROT  contains 77'977 sequence entries, comprising
    28'268'293 amino acids abstracted from 62'513 references. This represents
    an increase  of 5.3%  over release  36. The  growth of  the data  bank is
    summarized below.

     Release      Date           Number of       Number of amino
                                   entries                 acids
        2.0       09/86               3939               900 163
        3.0       11/86               4160               969 641
        4.0       04/87               4387             1 036 010
        5.0       09/87               5205             1 327 683
        6.0       01/88               6102             1 653 982
        7.0       04/88               6821             1 885 771
        8.0       08/88               7724             2 224 465
        9.0       11/88               8702             2 498 140
       10.0       03/89              10008             2 952 613
       11.0       07/89              10856             3 265 966
       12.0       10/89              12305             3 797 482
       13.0       01/90              13837             4 347 336
       14.0       04/90              15409             4 914 264
       15.0       08/90              16941             5 486 399
       16.0       11/90              18364             5 986 949
       17.0       02/91              20024             6 524 504
       18.0       05/91              20772             6 792 034
       19.0       08/91              21795             7 173 785
       20.0       11/91              22654             7 500 130
       21.0       03/92              23742             7 866 596
       22.0       05/92              25044             8 375 696
       23.0       08/92              26706             9 011 391
       24.0       12/92              28154             9 545 427
       25.0       04/93              29955            10 214 020
       26.0       07/93              31808            10 875 091
       27.0       10/93              33329            11 484 420
       28.0       02/94              36000            12 496 420
       29.0       06/94              38303            13 464 008
       30.0       10/94              40292            14 147 368
       31.0       02/95              43470            15 335 248
       32.0       11/95              49340            17 385 503
       33.0       02/96              52205            18 531 384
       34.0       10/96              59021            21 210 389
       35.0       11/97              69113            25 083 768
       36.0       07/98              74019            26 840 295
       37.0       12/98              77977            28 268 293



         2.  DESCRIPTION OF THE CHANGES MADE TO SWISS-PROT SINCE RELEASE 36


    2.1  Sequences and annotations

    3'988 sequences  have been  added since  release 36, the sequence data of
    667 existing  entries has  been updated  and the  annotations  of  12'047
    entries have been revised.


    2.2  What's happening with the model organisms

    We have  selected a  number of  organisms that  are the  target of genome
    sequencing and/or mapping projects and for which we intend to:

    o  Be as  complete as possible.  All sequences  available at a given time
       should  be  immediately  included  in  SWISS-PROT.  This also includes
       sequence corrections and updates;
    o  Provide a higher level of annotation;
    o  Provide  cross-references  to  specialized  database(s) that  contain,
       among other  data,  some genetic information about the genes that code
       for these proteins;
    o  Provide specific indices or documents.

    Here is the current status of the model organisms in SWISS-PROT:

     Organism        Database            Index file       Number of
                     cross-referenced                     sequences
     --------------  ----------------    --------------   ---------
     A.thaliana      None yet            In preparation         792
     B.subtilis      SubtiList           SUBTILIS.TXT          2046
     C.albicans      None yet            CALBICAN.TXT           194
     C.elegans       Wormpep             CELEGANS.TXT          1956
     D.discoideum    DictyDB             DICTY.TXT              285
     D.melanogaster  FlyBase             FLY.TXT               1064
     E.coli          EcoGene             ECOLI.TXT             4476
     H.influenzae    HiDB (TIGR)         HAEINFLU.TXT          1701
     H.sapiens       MIM                 MIMTOSP.TXT           5146
     H.pylori        HpDB (TIGR)         HPYLORI.TXT            367
     M.genitalium    MgDB (TIGR)         MGENITAL.TXT           470
     M.musculus      MGD                 MGDTOSP.TXT           3387
     M.jannaschii    MjDB (TIGR)         MJANNASC.TXT          1307
     M.tuberculosis  None yet            None yet               918
     S.cerevisiae    SGD                 YEAST.TXT             4806
     S.typhimurium   StyGene             SALTY.TXT              723
     S.pombe         None yet            POMBE.TXT             1406
     S.solfataricus  None yet            None yet                84

    We  plan  to  finish  as  quickly  as  possible  the  annotation  of  the
    Escherichia coli,  Haemophilus influenzae,  Methanococcus jannaschii  and
    yeast (S.cerevisiae)  sequence entries  which are  not yet part of SWISS-
    PROT.


    2.3  Switch to the NCBI taxonomy

    To contribute  to the standardization of the taxonomies used in molecular
    sequence databases  we have changed our taxonomy with release 37. We have
    switched  to   the  NCBI   taxonomy,  which   is  already   used  by  the
    DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank   nucleotide    sequence   databases.   The   taxonomic
    classification maintained  at the  NCBI  is  available  from  the  server
    http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy.

    This modification affects the OC (Organism Classification) lines. However
    it has  no impact  on the  format of that line-type, only on its content.
    For example, the OC lines for Homo sapiens (human) used to be:

    OC   EUKARYOTA; METAZOA; CHORDATA; VERTEBRATA; TETRAPODA; MAMMALIA;
    OC   EUTHERIA; PRIMATES.

    and is now:

    OC   EUKARYOTA; METAZOA; CHORDATA; VERTEBRATA; MAMMALIA; EUTHERIA;
    OC   PRIMATES; CATARRHINI; HOMINIDAE; HOMO.

    The switch  to  the  new  taxonomy  indirectly  brings  along  additional
    changes. Most of these changes are subtle, yet they may have an impact on
    some users  and some  specific usage of SWISS-PROT. We will describe here
    some of these changes.

    The NCBI taxonomy is much more detailed than that formerly used by SWISS-
    PROT. The  number of  nodes listed in the OC lines is therefore generally
    larger. For example, the taxonomic lineage for Pisum sativum (garden pea)
    used to be:

    OC   EUKARYOTA; PLANTA; EMBRYOPHYTA; ANGIOSPERMAE; DICOTYLEDONEAE;
    OC   FABALES; FABACEAE.

    It is now:

    OC   EUKARYOTA; VIRIDIPLANTAE; STREPTOPHYTA; EMBRYOPHYTA; TRACHEOPHYTA;
    OC   EUPHYLLOPHYTES; SPERMATOPHYTA; MAGNOLIOPHYTA; EUDICOTYLEDONS;
    OC   ROSIDAE; FABALES; FABACEAE; PAPILIONOIDEAE; PISUM.

    The names  of the  taxonomic kingdoms  at the  root of the NCBI taxonomic
    tree differ from the old SWISS-PROT taxonomy in the following manner:

            NCBI        Old SWISS-PROT
            ----------  --------------
            Archaea     Archaebacteria
            Bacteria    Prokaryota
            Eukaryota   Eukaryota
            Viruses     Viridae

    This is important for users selecting a subset of the database based on a
    particular taxonomic kingdom.

    We  also   changed  the   names  of   the  corresponding   files  in  the
    special_selection section  of the anonymous FTP server (see section 7.1).
    The files:

    archaebacteria.seq.xxxxxx
    eukaryota     .seq.xxxxxx
    prokaryota    .seq.xxxxxx
    viridae       .seq.xxxxxx

    (where 'xxxxxx' is the date the file was created) are now renamed:

    archaea       .seq.xxxxxx
    eukaryota     .seq.xxxxxx
    bacteria      .seq.xxxxxx
    viruses       .seq.xxxxxx

    The format  and content  of  the 'speclist.txt' documentation  file  (see
    section 4)  has changed.  It no  longer contains the section that used to
    list the taxonomic nodes as it would now be too cumbersome to be included
    in such a document. The SWISS-PROT taxonomic node code is replaced by the
    NCBI  taxonomy  ID  (TaxID).  As  the  NCBI  code  does  not  convey  any
    information per  se on  which taxonomic  kingdom a species belongs to, we
    have followed each organism code by a letter that indicates the taxonomic
    kingdom a species belongs to. It can be one of the following:

    'A' for archaea (=archaebacteria);
    'B' for bacteria (=prokaryota or eubacteria);
    'E' for eukaryota;
    'V' for viruses and phages (=viridae).

    Example:

    DROME E 007227: N=Drosophila melanogaster
                    C=Fruit fly

    On the ExPASy WWW version (http://www.expasy.ch/cgi-bin/speclist) of this
    document, the  NCBI TaxID  is an active link to the NCBI server, querying
    the Taxonomic database on the lineage of the selected organism.

    While in  the process  of mapping  the old SWISS-PROT taxonomy to that of
    NCBI, we  corrected more  than 100  misspelling in species names. We also
    updated many  names to  newer and more appropriate designations (but kept
    the previous names as synonyms).


    2.4  Introduction of the Reference Title (RT) line-type

    In release  37 we  have introduced  a new  line type,  the RT  (Reference
    Title) line. This optional line is placed between the RA and RL line. The
    RT line  gives the title of the paper (or other work) cited as exactly as
    possible given  the limitations of the computer character set. The format
    of the RT line is:

    RT   "TITLE";

    An example of the use of RT lines is shown below:

    RT   "Sequence analysis of the genome of the unicellular cyanobacterium
    RT   Synechocystis sp. strain PCC6803. I. Sequence features in the 1 Mb
    RT   region from map positions 64% to 92% of the genome.";

    It should be noted that:

    o The form  used is  that which  would be  used in a citation rather than
      that displayed  at the  top of the published paper. For instance, where
      journals capitalize major title words this is not preserved;
    o The text of a title ends  with either a period '.', a question mark '?'
      or an exclamation mark '!';
    o Double  quotation  marks '"' are  not present in the text of the title;
      they are replaced by single quotation marks;
    o Titles of articles published in a language other than English have been
      translated into English;
    o Greek letters are spelled out (alpha, beta, etc.).

    The RT  lines were  introduced in  journal, book and patent references as
    well as  in some  other types  of references  (Plant Gene  Register, Worm
    Breeder Gazette).  They have  not yet  been systematically introduced for
    unpublished submissions. The RT lines were introduced using the following
    sources of information:

    o  For all  references linked to Medline,  the  titles were automatically
       extracted from the relevant Medline abstracts;
    o  The  EMBL DNA  sequence  database  was  then  automatically scanned to
       retrieve additional titles. We then searched for the remaining missing
       titles in a variety of on-line resources:
    o  The  LITDB    bibliographic  database    from  the   Protein  Research
       Foundation in Japan;
    o  The AGRICOLA bibliographic database from NAL;
    o  The Web sites of various journals;
    o  The Korean journals abstract database;
    o  The PDB 3D-structure database;
    o  The MIM database;
    o  The Plant Gene Register;
    o  The NCBI Entrez protein search tool;
    o  The European Patent Office patent database;
    o  About 200 titles were typed-in by going to various libraries in Geneva
       to find the relevant papers;
    o  Finally some authors, editors or publishers were  contacted  by email.
       We want  to thank  all  those  that  responded and sent us titles that
       would otherwise have been very difficult to find.

    Currently out  of more  than 62000 references, we only lack the title for
    less than 50 (this corresponds to a coverage of more than 99.9%).

    The RT  line has been introduced in mixed-case, instead of the ALL UPPER-
    CASE format used elsewhere in SWISS-PROT. As you will see in section 3.1,
    we plan to gradually convert all of SWISS-PROT to mixed-case.


    2.5  Changes affecting the accession numbers

    With the  creation of  the TrEMBL  database (see section 6) and the rapid
    increase in  the amount  of sequence data, we are faced with a problem of
    availability of  accession numbers.  Currently we use a system based on a
    one-letter prefix  followed by 5 digits. This system was also used by the
    nucleotide sequence  databases which  had originally  reserved for SWISS-
    PROT the  prefix letters 'P' and 'Q'. The nucleotide databases having run
    out of space (due mainly to EST's), have been forced to start using a new
    format based on a two-letter prefix followed by 6 digits.

    We have used up all possible numbers with 'P' and 'Q' and the only letter
    prefix which  was not  used by  the nucleotide  database is  'O'.  As  we
    believe that  changing the  format of  the accession numbers to that used
    now by  the nucleotide  database  would  create  havoc  on  the  numerous
    software packages  using SWISS-PROT,  we have decided to keep a system of
    accession numbers  based on  a six-character code, but with the following
    changes:

    o We  have  started  using  'O'.  This  extra  letter  should  allow  the
      continuation of  the present  format (1  prefix letter  + 5 digits) for
      approximately one year.
    o When we  will have  finished using  up 'O',  we will introduce a system
      based on the following format:

        1        2       3          4            5            6
        [O,P,Q]  [0-9]  [A-Z, 0-9]  [A-Z, 0-9]   [A-Z, 0-9]   [0-9]

    What the  above means is that we will keep a six-character code, but that
    in positions  3, 4  and 5  of this  code any  combination of  letters and
    numbers can  be present.  This  format  allows  a  total  of  14  million
    accession numbers (up from 300'000 with the current system).

    We only  allow numbers  in positions  2 and  6  so  that  the  SWISS-PROT
    accession numbers  can not  be mistaken  with gene names, acronyms, other
    type of accession numbers or any type of words!

    Examples: P0A3S2, Q2ASD4, O13YX2, P9B123


    2.6  Changes concerning the reference location line (RL)

    The (IN)  prefix is  mainly used  for book  citations. We  have  slightly
    changed the  format of  these book  citations so  that the  format is now
    similar to  that used  by the  EMBL nucleotide sequence database. The new
    format is:

    RL   (IN) EDITOR_1 I.[, EDITOR2 I., EDITOR_X I.] (EDS.);
    RL   BOOK-NAME, PP.[VOL:]FIRST-LAST, PUBLISHER, CITY (YEAR).

    So, what was before:

    RL   (IN) TRENDS IN QSAR AND MOLECULAR MODELING 92, WERMUTH C.G., ED.,
    RL   PP.485-486, ESCOM, LEIDEN, (1993).

    is now:

    RL   (IN) WERMUTH C.G. (EDS.);
    RL   TRENDS IN QSAR AND MOLECULAR MODELLING 92, PP.485-486, ESCOM
    RL   SCIENCE PUBLISHERS, LEIDEN (1993).

    Since release 36, the (IN) prefix has also been used for citations to the
    electronic Plant Gene Register. In release 37 it can additionally be used
    for    references     to    the     Worm    Breeders     Gazette     (see
    http://elegans.swmed.edu/wli/). Example:

    RL   (IN) WORM BREEDER'S GAZETTE 15(3):34(1998).


    2.7  Cleaning up of the SIMILARITY comment line (CC) topic

    We are continuing a major overhaul of the SIMILARITY topic. We would like
    the majority  of the  information stored  in this  topic to  be usable by
    computer  programs   (while  being   human-readable).  We  are  therefore
    standardizing the  format of  this topic  using two different subformats.
    One to describe to which family a protein belongs:

    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE <Name1> FAMILY [OF <Name2>].
    CC        [<Name3> SUBFAMILY.]

    Examples:

    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE 14-3-3 FAMILY.
    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE 6-PHOSPHOGLUCONATE DEHYDROGENASE
    CC        FAMILY.
    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE AAA FAMILY OF ATPASES.
    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE IRON/ASCORBATE-DEPENDENT FAMILY OF
    CC        OXIDOREDUCTASES.
    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE ANTP FAMILY OF HOMEOBOX PROTEINS.
    CC        "DEFORMED" SUBFAMILY.
    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE KINESIN-LIKE PROTEIN FAMILY. KINESIN
    CC        SUBFAMILY.

    And one to describe which domains are found in a given protein:

    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: CONTAINS n <Name> [DOMAIN|REPEAT][S].

    Examples:

    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: CONTAINS 1 FHA DOMAIN.
    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: CONTAINS 45 EGF-LIKE DOMAINS.
    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: CONTAINS 2 SH3 DOMAINS.
    CC   -!-  SIMILARITY: CONTAINS 2 SUSHI (SCR) REPEATS.

    We have  already updated  many entries  in this and the previous releases
    and plan to complete this change for the next release.


    2.8  Changes concerning cross-references (DR line)

    We have added cross-references from SWISS-PROT to the Pfam protein domain
    database  (see   http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Pfam/;  reference:  Bateman  A.,
    Birney E., Durbin R., Eddy S.R., Finn R.D. and Sonnhammer E.L.L.; Nucleic
    Acids Res.  27:260-262(1999)). These  cross-references are present in the
    DR lines.  The specific format for cross-references to the Pfam databases
    is almost identical to that used for the PROSITE database:

    DR   PFAM; ACCESSION_NUMBER; ENTRY_NAME; STATUS.

    Where 'ACCESSION_NUMBER' stands for the accession number of the Pfam HMM-
    profile  entry; 'ENTRY_NAME' is  the  name  of  the entry and 'STATUS' is
    either  'n' or  'PARTIAL'.  'n' is  the  number of hits of the profile in
    that particular protein sequence. The 'PARTIAL' status indicates that the
    profile did not detect the sequence because that sequence is not complete
    and lacks the region on  which is  the profile  is based.  The difference
    between the cross-references to  Pfam and  those to  PROSITE is  that the
    PROSITE DR  lines  make  use  of two additional 'STATUS': 'FALSE_NEG' and
    'UNKNOWN'.

    Examples of Pfam cross-references:

    DR   PFAM; PF00017; SH2; 1.
    DR   PFAM; PF00008; EGF; 8.
    DR   PFAM; PF00595; PDZ; PARTIAL.


    In this  release, we  have also  updated all the DR lines pointing to the
    HSSP, Mendel and TRANSFAC databases.




                            3. PLANNED CHANGES


    3.1  Conversion of SWISS-PROT to mixed-case characters

    We are  happy to  announce that we will gradually start the conversion of
    SWISS-PROT entries from all 'UPPER CASE' to 'MiXeD CaSe'. The first line-
    type that  follows the  new format  is the  newly introduced RT line (see
    section 2.4). In release 38 we are planning to convert the following line
    types:

                            DT, OS, OG, OC, RL and KW

    Further lines  will be  converted in  release 39,  and this  process will
    probably be  completed for  January 1,  2000. We  can't enter  the  third
    millennium with  a  carry  over  from  the  time  of  punched  tapes  and
    teletypes!

    Here is  an example  of what a SWISS-PROT entry will look like in release
    38:

    ID   PETG_CYAPA     STANDARD;      PRT;    37 AA.
    AC   P14236;
    DT   01-JAN-1990 (Rel. 13, Created)
    DT   01-JAN-1990 (Rel. 13, Last sequence update)
    DT   01-NOV-1997 (Rel. 35, Last annotation update)
    DE   CYTOCHROME B6-F COMPLEX SUBUNIT 5.
    GN   PETG.
    OS   Cyanophora paradoxa.
    OG   Cyanelle.
    OC   Eukaryota; Glaucocystophyceae; Cyanophoraceae; Cyanophora.
    RN   [1]
    RP   SEQUENCE FROM N.A.
    RC   STRAIN=LB555 / PRINGSHEIM;
    RX   MEDLINE; 90098772.
    RA   STIREWALT V.L., BRYANT D.A.;
    RT   "Molecular cloning and nucleotide sequence of the petG gene of the
    RT   cyanelle genome of Cyanophora paradoxa.";
    RL   Nucleic Acids Res. 17:10095-10095(1989).
    RN   [2]
    RP   SEQUENCE FROM N.A.
    RC   STRAIN=LB555 / PRINGSHEIM;
    RA   STIREWALT V.L., MICHALOWSKI C.B., LUFFELHARDT W., BOHNERT H.J.,
    RA   BRYANT D.A.;
    RL   Submitted (JUL-1995) to the EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ databases.
    CC   -!- FUNCTION: THE CYTOCHROME B6-F COMPLEX FUNCTIONS IN THE LINEAR
    CC       CROSS-MEMBRANE TRANSPORT OF ELECTRONS BETWEEN PHOTOSYSTEM II AND
    CC       I, AS WELL AS IN CYCLIC ELECTRON FLOW AROUND PHOTOSYSTEM I.
    CC       PETG IS REQUIRED FOR EITHER THE STABILITY OR ASSEMBLY OF THE
    CC       CYTOCHROME B6-F COMPLEX.
    CC   -!- SUBCELLULAR LOCATION: THYLAKOID MEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED.
    CC   -!- SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE PETG FAMILY.
    DR   EMBL; X16974; G12549; -.
    DR   EMBL; U30821; G1016164; -.
    DR   PIR; S06916; S06916.
    DR   MENDEL; 7879; CYApa;petG;1.
    KW   Electron transport; Respiratory chain; Cyanelle;
    KW   Thylakoid membrane; Transmembrane.
    FT   DOMAIN        1      4       LUMENAL (POTENTIAL).
    FT   TRANSMEM      5     25       POTENTIAL.
    FT   DOMAIN       26     37       STROMAL (POTENTIAL).
    SQ   SEQUENCE   37 AA;  4139 MW;  265A8973 CRC32;
         MVEPLLSGIV LGLIPVTLIG LFVAAYLQYR RGNQFEF
    //


    3.2  Extension of the accession number system

    As already  explained in  detail under  2.5, we will extend the accession
    number system  when we  will have  used up  the 'O'  series of  accession
    numbers. This can be anticipated for early 1999.


    3.3  Introduction of a new CC line-type topic: MISCELLANEOUS

    We will introduce in the next release a new 'topic' for the comments (CC)
    line-type:  'MISCELLANEOUS'.  This  topic  will  be used for all comments
    which  do not  belong to any other already defined topic. What this means
    is that,  starting with release 38, all comment lines will be assigned to
    a topic. Example:

    CC   -!- BINDS TO BACITRACIN.

    will become:

    CC   -!- MISCELLANEOUS: BINDS TO BACITRACIN.


    3.4  Introduction  of   a  unique   identifier  in  the  VARIANT  feature
         description of human sequence entries

    We plan  to introduce  in release  38 a unique identifier for all VARIANT
    feature keys  in human  sequence entries.  This change  is the first step
    toward providing  a unique  identifier to  all SWISS-PROT features. Human
    sequence  variants   were  chosen   as  a   prototype  for  this  planned
    improvement. It  will be  possible, as  soon as  these identifiers become
    available, to  directly link  specific sequence  variants to the relevant
    entries in  disease mutation  databases  as  well  as  to  provide  these
    databases with a method to implement reciprocal links.

    The  unique identifier will be of the form of '/FTId=VAR_nnnnnn' and will
    be added as the last part of the description field of a 'VARIANT' feature
    keys. Examples:

    FT   VARIANT       6      6       E -> V (IN S; SICKLE CELL ANEMIA).
    FT   VARIANT      11     11       V -> D (IN WINDSOR; O2 AFFINITY UP;
    FT                                UNSTABLE).

    will become:

    FT   VARIANT       6      6       E -> V (IN S; SICKLE CELL ANEMIA);
    FT                                /FTId=VAR_000001.
    FT   VARIANT      11     11       V -> D (IN WINDSOR; O2 AFFINITY UP;
    FT                                UNSTABLE); /FTId=VAR_000234.


    3.5  Small change  in the  format of  RL lines for submissions to the DNA
         databases

    Along with  the conversion of the RL to mixed-case (see 3.1) we will also
    make a  small change to the format of RL lines for submissions to the DNA
    databases. What is now:

    RL   SUBMITTED (MMM-YEAR) TO EMBL/GENBANK/DDBJ DATA BANKS.

    will be changed to:

    RL   Submitted (MMM-YEAR) to the EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ databases.

    Such a change is made so as to follow more closely the format used by the
    EMBL nucleotide sequence database.




                      4. STATUS OF THE DOCUMENTATION FILES


    SWISS-PROT is  distributed with  a large  number of  documentation files.
    Some of these files have been available for a long time (the user manual,
    release notes,  the various  indices for  authors,  citations,  keywords,
    etc.), but many have been created recently and we are continuously adding
    new files. The following table lists all the documents that are currently
    available.

     USERMAN.TXT    User manual
     RELNOTES.TXT   Release notes for current release (37)
     OLDRLNOT.TXT   Release notes for previous release (36)
     SHORTDES.TXT   Short description of entries in SWISS-PROT
     JOURLIST.TXT   List of abbreviations for journals cited [see 1]
     KEYWLIST.TXT   List of keywords in use [see 2]
     SPECLIST.TXT   List of organism identification codes [see 3]
     TISSLIST.TXT   List of tissues
     EXPERTS.TXT    List of on-line experts for PROSITE and SWISS-PROT
     SUBMIT.TXT     Submission of sequence data to SWISS-PROT

     ACINDEX.TXT    Accession number index
     AUTINDEX.TXT   Author index
     CITINDEX.TXT   Citation index
     KEYINDEX.TXT   Keyword index
     SPEINDEX.TXT   Species index
     DELETEAC.TXT   Deleted accession number index

     7TMRLIST.TXT   List of 7-transmembrane G-linked receptors entries
     AATRNASY.TXT   List of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
     ALLERGEN.TXT   Nomenclature and index of allergen sequences
     BLOODGRP.TXT   List of blood group antigen proteins
     CALBICAN.TXT   Index   of  Candida  albicans  entries   and  their
                    corresponding gene designations
     CDLIST.TXT     CD  nomenclature  for  surface  proteins  of  human
                    leucocytes
     CELEGANS.TXT   Index  of Caenorhabditis elegans entries  and their
                    corresponding gene Wormpep cross-references
     DICTY.TXT      Index   of  Dictyostelium  discoideum  entries  and
                    their  corresponding gene designations  and DictyDb
                    cross-references
     EC2DTOSP.TXT   Index  of  Escherichia coli  Gene-protein  database
                    entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     ECOLI.TXT      Index  of Escherichia coli K12  chromosomal entries
                    and their corresponding EcoGene cross-references
     EMBLTOSP.TXT   Index  of   EMBL  Database  entries  referenced  in
                    SWISS-PROT
     EXTRADOM.TXT   Nomenclature of extracellular domains
     FLY.TXT        Index  of  Drosophila  entries and  FlyBase  cross-
                    references
     GLYCOSID.TXT   Classification  of glycosyl hydrolase  families and
                    index of glycosyl hydrolase entries
     HAEINFLU.TXT   Index  of  Haemophilus  influenzae  RD  chromosomal
                    entries
     HOXLIST.TXT    Vertebrate  homeotic Hox proteins: nomenclature and
                    index
     HPYLORI.TXT    Index   of   Helicobacter   pylori   strain   26695
                    chromosomal entries
     HUMCHR17.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 17
     HUMCHR18.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 18
     HUMCHR19.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 19
     HUMCHR20.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 20
     HUMCHR21.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 21
     HUMCHR22.TXT   Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome 22
     HUMCHRX.TXT    Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome X
     HUMCHRY.TXT    Index of protein  sequence entries encoded on human
                    chromosome Y
     HUMPVAR.TXT    Index of human proteins with sequence variants
     INITFACT.TXT   List and index of translation initiation factors
     MIMTOSP.TXT    Index of MIM entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     METALLO.TXT    Classification  of  metallothioneins and  index  of
                    entries in SWISS-PROT
     MGDTOSP.TXT    Index of MGD entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     MGENITAL.TXT   Index  of Mycoplasma genitalium chromosomal entries
     MJANNASC.TXT   Index of Methanococcus jannaschii entries
     NGR234.TXT     Table  of   putative  genes  in  Rhizobium  plasmid
                    pNGR234a
     NOMLIST.TXT    List   of  nomenclature   related  references   for
                    proteins
     PCC6803.TXT    Index of Synechocystis strain PCC 6803 entries
     PDBTOSP.TXT    Index  of X-ray  crystallography Protein Data  Bank
                    (PDB) entries referenced in SWISS-PROT
     PEPTIDAS.TXT   Classification  of peptidase families and  index of
                    peptidase entries
     PLASTID.TXT    List of chloroplast and cyanelle encoded proteins
     POMBE.TXT      Index   of  Schizosaccharomyces  pombe  entries  in
                    SWISS-PROT    and    their    corresponding    gene
                    designations
     RESTRIC.TXT    List of restriction enzyme and methylase entries
     RIBOSOMP.TXT   Index of  ribosomal proteins classified by families
                    on the basis of sequence similarities
     SALTY.TXT      Index  of  Salmonella typhimurium  LT2  chromosomal
                    entries  and  their  corresponding  StyGene  cross-
                    references
     SUBTILIS.TXT   Index of  Bacillus subtilis 168 chromosomal entries
                    and their corresponding SubtiList cross-references
     UPFLIST.TXT    UPF  (Uncharacterized  Protein Families)  list  and
                    index of members
     YEAST.TXT      Index   of  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  entries  and
                    their corresponding gene designations
     YEAST1.TXT     Yeast Chromosome I entries
     YEAST2.TXT     Yeast Chromosome II entries
     YEAST3.TXT     Yeast Chromosome III entries
     YEAST5.TXT     Yeast Chromosome V entries
     YEAST6.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VI entries
     YEAST7.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VII entries
     YEAST8.TXT     Yeast Chromosome VIII entries
     YEAST9.TXT     Yeast Chromosome IX entries
     YEAST10.TXT    Yeast Chromosome X entries
     YEAST11.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XI entries
     YEAST13.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XIII entries
     YEAST14.TXT    Yeast Chromosome XIV entries

    Notes:

    [1]  The journal list ('jourlist.txt') has been extensively updated. This
         document now  lists for  each journal  the name  of  its  publisher.
         Journal subtitles,  when they  are available,  have also been added.
         This file  can now  be considered as a mini-database on life science
         journals. It  lists 1073  journals and  contains more  than 800  Web
         links. Example of an entry in the journal list:

         Abbrev: Allergy
         Title : Allergy
                 [European Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology]
         ISSN  : 0105-4538
         CODEN : LLRGDY
         Publis: Munksgaard
         Note  : Replaces Acta Allergol., starts with vol. 33 in 1978.
         Server: http://www.munksgaard.dk/allergy/

    [2]  The keyword  list ('keywlist.txt') has been converted to  mixed-case
         characters.
    [3]  The species  list ('speclist.txt') has been extensively  updated due
         to the  switch  to  the NCBI taxonomy (see section 2.3); it also has
         been converted to mixed-case characters.

    We have  continued to  include in  some  SWISS-PROT  document  files  the
    references of  Web sites  relevant to  the subject  under  consideration.
    There are now 40 documents that include such links.




                      5. THE EXPASY WORLD-WIDE WEB SERVER


    5.1  Background information

    The most  efficient and  user-friendly way  to  browse  interactively  in
    SWISS-PROT, PROSITE,  ENZYME, SWISS-2DPAGE  and other databases is to use
    the World-Wide  Web (WWW)  molecular biology  server ExPASy.  The  ExPASy
    server was  made available  to  the  public  in  September  1993  and  is
    reachable at the following address:

                              http://www.expasy.ch/

    The ExPASy  WWW server  allows access,  using the user-friendly hypertext
    model, to  the SWISS-PROT,  PROSITE, ENZYME,  SWISS-2DPAGE, SWISS-3DIMAGE
    and CD40Lbase  databases. And,  through any  SWISS-PROT protein  sequence
    entry, to  other databases  such as  EMBL,  Eco2DBASE,  EcoCyc,  FlyBase,
    GCRDb, MaizeDB,  Mendel, OMIM,  PDB, HSSP,  Pfam,  ProDom,  REBASE,  SGD,
    SubtiList/NRSub, TRANSFAC, YPD and Medline. ExPAsy also offers many tools
    for the analysis of protein sequences and 2D gels.


    5.2  Swiss-Shop

    We provide,  on ExPASy,  a service  called Swiss-Shop.  Swiss-Shop is  an
    automated sequence  alerting system  which allows  users  to  obtain,  by
    email, new  sequence entries  relevant to  their  field(s)  of  interest.
    Various criteria can be combined:

    o    By entering  one or  more  words  that  should  be  present  in  the
         description line;
    o    By entering one or more species name(s) or taxonomic division(s);
    o    By entering one or more keywords;
    o    By entering one or more author names;
    o    By entering  the accession  number (or  entry  name)  of  a  PROSITE
         pattern or a user-defined sequence pattern;
    o    By entering  the accession  number (or  entry name)  of an  existing
         SWISS-PROT entry or by entering a private sequence.

    Every week,  the new  sequences entered  in SWISS-PROT  are automatically
    compared with  all the criteria that have been defined by the users. If a
    sequence corresponds  to the  selection criteria  defined by a user, that
    sequence is sent by electronic mail.


    5.3  What is new on ExPASy

    ExPASy is constantly modified and improved. If you wish to be informed on
    the changes made to the server you can either:

    o    Read the  document History of changes, improvements and new features
         which is available at the address:

                     http://www.expasy.ch/www/history.html

    o    Subscribe to  Swiss-Flash, a service that reports news of databases,
         software and  services developments. By subscribing to this service,
         you will automatically get Swiss-Flash bulletins by electronic mail.
         To subscribe use the address:

                  http://www.expasy.ch/www/swiss-flash.html

    Among all  the improvements  and the  new features  introduced during the
    last  six   months,  there  are  at  least  three  that  we  believe  are
    specifically useful to SWISS-PROT users:

    o NiceProt is a tool that provides a user-friendly tabular view of SWISS-
      PROT entries. The 'NiceProt View of SWISS-PROT' is accessible  from the
      top and  bottom of  each  SWISS-PROT entry on ExPASy.  You can use this
      tool  to link  to any  SWISS-PROT by using the following style  of URL:
      http://www.expasy.ch/cgi-bin/niceprot.pl?P01585 (where the last part of
      the URL is a valid primary accession number).

    o The  SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL  full  text  search  tool has been improved. The
      databases are now  indexed  using  the Glimpse search engine, wildcards
      can be used in query strings, more fields (line types) are  indexed and
      response times are much shorter than before. See:

                 http://www.expasy.ch/cgi-bin/sprot-search-ful

    o Users who wish to save and retrieve all SWISS-PROT entries  originating
      from  a species can do this via the SWISS-PROT 'speclist.txt' document.
      By clicking on any of the species codes and specifying a file name, one
      can save  all corresponding  entries to  a file  that can be  retrieved
      from the anonymous ExPASy FTP server.




                      6. TREMBL - A SUPPLEMENT TO SWISS-PROT


    The ongoing  genome sequencing  and mapping  projects  have  dramatically
    increased the  number of protein sequences to be incorporated into SWISS-
    PROT. Since  we do not want to dilute the quality standards of SWISS-PROT
    by incorporating  sequences into  the database  without  proper  sequence
    analysis and  annotation, we  cannot speed  up the  incorporation of  new
    incoming data  indefinitely. But  as we  also want  to make the sequences
    available as  fast as  possible, we  have introduced  with  SWISS-PROT  a
    computer annotated  supplement. This  supplement consists  of entries  in
    SWISS-PROT-like  format  derived  from  the  translation  of  all  coding
    sequences (CDS)  in the  EMBL nucleotide  sequence database, except those
    already included in SWISS-PROT.

    We name  this supplement  TrEMBL  (Translation  from  EMBL).  It  can  be
    considered as  a  preliminary  section  of  SWISS-PROT.  This  SWISS-PROT
    release is  supplemented by TrEMBL release 8. TrEMBL is split in two main
    sections; SP-TrEMBL and REM-TrEMBL:

    SP-TrEMBL (SWISS-PROT TrEMBL) contains the entries (180'763 in release 8)
    which  should  be  incorporated  into  SWISS-PROT.  SWISS-PROT  accession
    numbers have been assigned for all SP-TrEMBL entries.

    REM-TrEMBL (REMaining  TrEMBL) contains the entries (43'780 in release 8)
    that we  do not  want to  include in  SWISS-PROT for a variety of reasons
    (synthetic sequences, pseudogenes, translations of incorrect open reading
    frames, fragments  with  less  than  eight  amino  acids,  patent-derived
    sequences, immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors, etc.)

    TrEMBL is  available by  FTP from  the EBI  and  ExPASy  servers  in  the
    directory databases/trembl'.  It can  be queried  on WWW  by the  EBI and
    ExPASy SRS  servers. It is also searchable on the FASTA, BIC-SW and BLAST
    servers of the EBI.




                    7.  FTP ANONYMOUS ACCESS TO SWISS-PROT


    7.1  Generalities

    SWISS-PROT is  available for  download on  the  following  anonymous  FTP
    servers:

    Organization   Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)
    Address        ftp.expasy.ch
    Directory      /databases/swiss-prot/

    Organization   European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
    Address        ftp.ebi.ac.uk
    Directory      /pub/databases/swissprot/

    We have  reorganized the  directory on the ExPASy FTP server where SWISS-
    PROT is stored. The new organization is shown below.

    +--swiss-prot-+
                  |
                  |--release             The files for the current release of
                  |                      SWISS-PROT
                  |
                  |--release_compressed  The files of the compressed version
                  |                      (*.Z) of the current release of SWISS-
                  |                      PROT
                  |
                  |--special_selections  Files storing SWISS-PROT entries either
                  |                      from a specific taxonomic subset or
                  |                      linked to a specific database
                  |
                  |--sw_old_releases     The compressed 'tar' (archive) files
                  |                      of previous releases of SWISS-PROT
                  |
                  +--updates             The files of the cumulative weekly
                  |                      updates
                  |
                  +--updates_compressed  The files of the compressed version
                                         (*.Z) of the cumulative weekly updates


    The main differences from the previous release are:

    o The  SWISS-PROT  release  files  are  now  in  a  subdirectory  (swiss-
      prot/release) instead of the main directory which is now devoid of data
      files.
    o A  new   subdirectory  (swiss-prot/sw_old_releases)   was  created.  It
      contains Unix  compressed 'tar' (archive) files of previous releases of
      SWISS-PROT.  Each   release  is   stored  in   a  file  with  the  name
      sprotNN.tar.Z where  NN is a release number. Such a file stores all the
      documentation (*.txt)  files and  the data  file (sprotNN.dat)  of  the
      corresponding SWISS-PROT  release. The  release notes  are renamed from
      release.txt to  release.NN. We  have decided  to provide these files to
      answer two  kinds of  requests. The  main one originates from users who
      want to  compare sequence analysis algorithms by benchmarking them on a
      specific release  of the  database so  as to compare their results with
      those of  a competing  program. The  second type of requests originates
      from legal  departments of biotech companies that often want to be able
      to check  the state  of knowledge  on a  particular sequence at a given
      time frame.


    7.2  Weekly updates of SWISS-PROT

    Weekly updates  of SWISS-PROT are available by anonymous FTP. Three files
    are generated at each update:

    new_seq.dat    Contains all the new entries since the last full release;
    upd_seq.dat    Contains the  entries for which the sequence data has been
                   updated since the last release;
    upd_ann.dat    Contains the  entries for  which one  or  more  annotation
                   fields have been updated since the last release.

    !! Important notes !!

    o Although we  try to  follow a  regular schedule,  we do  not promise to
      update these  files every  week. In  most cases  two weeks  may  elapse
      between two updates.
    o Instead of  using the  above files,  you can,  every week,  download an
      updated copy  of the SWISS-PROT database. This file is available in the
      directory containing the non-redundant database (see next section).


    7.3  Non-redundant database

    About a  year ago,  we started  to distribute  on the  ExPASy and EBI FTP
    servers, files  that make  up a  non-redundant (see further) and complete
    protein sequence database consisting of three components:

    1) SWISS-PROT
    2) TrEMBL
    3) New  entries to  be later  integrated into  TrEMBL (hereafter known as
       TrEMBL_New)

    Every week  three files  are completely  rebuilt. These  files are named:
    sprot.dat.Z, trembl.dat.Z  and trembl_new.dat.Z. As indicated by their .Z
    extension these  are Unix compress format files which, when decompressed,
    will produce ASCII files in SWISS-PROT format.

    Three others  files are  also available  (sprot.fas.Z,  trembl.fas.Z  and
    trembl_new.fas.Z) Which are compressed fasta format sequence files useful
    for building  the databases  used by  FASTA,  BLAST  and  other  sequence
    similarity search  programs. Please  do not use these files for any other
    purpose, as  you will  lose all  annotations by using this very primitive
    format.

    The files  for the  non-redundant database  are stored  in the  directory
    /databases/sp_tr_nrdb on the ExPASy FTP server (ftp.expasy.ch) and in the
    directory   /pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb    on   the    EBI    FTP    server
    (ftp.ebi.ac.uk).

    Additional notes

    o The SWISS-PROT  file continuously  grows as new annotated sequences are
      added.

    o The TrEMBL  file decreases  in size  as sequences are moved out of that
      section after  being annotated  and moved into SWISS-PROT. Four times a
      year a  new release of TrEMBL is built at EBI, at this point the TrEMBL
      file increases  in size  as it  then includes  all of the new data (see
      next section) that has accumulated since the last release.

    o The TrEMBL_New file starts as a very small file and grows in size until
      a new release of TrEMBL is available.

    o SWISS-PROT and  TrEMBL share  the same  system  of  accession  numbers.
      Therefore you  will not  find any  primary accession  number duplicated
      between the  two sections. A TrEMBL entry (and its associated accession
      number(s)) can either move to SWISS-PROT as new entry or be merged with
      an existing  SWISS-PROT  entry.  In  the  latter  case,  the  accession
      number(s) of  that TrEMBL  entry are  added to  that of  the SWISS-PROT
      entry.

    o TrEMBL_New does  not  have  real  accession  numbers.  However  it  was
      necessary to  have an AC line so as to be able to use it with different
      software products.  This AC  line contains a temporary identifier which
      consists of  the pID (protein identifier) of the coding sequence in the
      parent nucleotide sequence.

    o While these three files allow you to build what we call a non-redundant
      database, it  must  be  noted  that  this  is  not  completely  a  true
      statement. Without  going into  a long explanation we can say that this
      is currently  the best  attempt in  providing a  complete selection  of
      protein sequence  entries while  trying to eliminate redundancies. Also
      SWISS-PROT is  completely (well 99.994% !) non-redundant, TrEMBL is far
      from being  non-redundant and  the addition  of SWISS-PROT  + TrEMBL is
      even less.

    o To describe  to your  users the  version of  the non-redundant database
      that you  are providing  them with,  you should  use a statement of the
      form:

         SWISS-PROT release 37 and updates until <current_date>;
         TrEMBL release  8  minus  data  integrated  into  SWISS-PROT  as  of
         <current_date>;
         New preliminary TrEMBL entries created since release 8 of TrEMBL




                             8.  ENZYME and PROSITE


    8.1  The ENZYME data bank

    Release 24.0  of the  ENZYME data  bank is distributed with release 37 of
    SWISS-PROT. ENZYME  release 24.0  contains information  relative to  3704
    enzymes. It  differs from  the previous release (23 of July 1998) in that
    we have  converted the  CA (Catalytic Activity) and DI (DIsease) lines to
    mixed-case characters.  The conversion  of the  ENZYME database  from ALL
    UPPER-CASE to mixed-case is therefore completed.

    Example, what was before:

    ID   1.14.15.4
    DE   Steroid 11-beta-monooxygenase.
    AN   Steroid 11-beta-hydroxylase.
    AN   Steroid 11-beta/18-hydroxylase.
    AN   Cytochrome p450 XIB1.
    CA   A STEROID + REDUCED ADRENAL FERREDOXIN + O(2) = AN 11-BETA-
    CA   HYDROXYSTEROID + OXIDIZED ADRENAL FERREDOXIN + H(2)O.
    CF   Heme-thiolate.
    CC   -!- Also hydroxylates steroids at the 18-position, and converts
    CC       18-hydroxycorticosterone into aldosterone.
    DI   ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA IV; MIM:202010.
    PR   PROSITE; PDOC00081;
    DR   P15150, CPN1_BOVIN;  Q64408, CPN1_CAVPO;  P15538, CPN1_HUMAN;
    DR   P97720, CPN1_MESAU;  Q29527, CPN1_PAPHA;  Q29552, CPN1_PIG  ;
    DR   Q92104, CPN1_RANCA;  P15393, CPN1_RAT  ;  P51663, CPN1_SHEEP;
    DR   P19099, CPN2_HUMAN;  Q64658, CPN2_MESAU;  P15539, CPN2_MOUSE;
    DR   P30099, CPN2_RAT  ;  P30100, CPN3_RAT  ;
    //

    is now:

    ID   1.14.15.4
    DE   Steroid 11-beta-monooxygenase.
    AN   Steroid 11-beta-hydroxylase.
    AN   Steroid 11-beta/18-hydroxylase.
    AN   Cytochrome p450 XIB1.
    CA   A steroid + reduced adrenal ferredoxin + O(2) = an 11-beta-
    CA   hydroxysteroid + oxidized adrenal ferredoxin + H(2)O.
    CF   Heme-thiolate.
    CC   -!- Also hydroxylates steroids at the 18-position, and converts
    CC       18-hydroxycorticosterone into aldosterone.
    DI   Adrenal hyperplasia IV; MIM:202010.
    PR   PROSITE; PDOC00081;
    DR   P15150, CPN1_BOVIN;  Q64408, CPN1_CAVPO;  P15538, CPN1_HUMAN;
    DR   P97720, CPN1_MESAU;  Q29527, CPN1_PAPHA;  Q29552, CPN1_PIG  ;
    DR   Q92104, CPN1_RANCA;  P15393, CPN1_RAT  ;  P51663, CPN1_SHEEP;
    DR   P19099, CPN2_HUMAN;  Q64658, CPN2_MESAU;  P15539, CPN2_MOUSE;
    DR   P30099, CPN2_RAT  ;  P30100, CPN3_RAT  ;
    //

    In this  release, we  have also updated and added a significant number of
    DI (Disease) lines and added synonyms (AN lines) to a number of entries.

    The WWW  version of  ENZYME on  ExPASy now  includes links  to the BRENDA
    database of enzymes. See:

      http://www.uni-koeln.de/math-nat-fak/biochemie/ds/dsbren_e.htm


    8.2  The PROSITE data bank

    Release 15.0  of the  PROSITE data bank is distributed with release 36 of
    SWISS-PROT. This  release of  PROSITE contains 1014 documentation entries
    that describe 1'352 different patterns, rules and profiles/matrices.



                           9. WE NEED YOUR HELP !


    We welcome  feedback from  our users. We would especially appreciate that
    you notify  us if  you find  that sequences  belonging to  your field  of
    expertise are  missing from  the database.  We  also  would  like  to  be
    notified about  annotations to  be updated, if, for example, the function
    of a  protein has  been clarified  or  if  new  information  about  post-
    translational modifications  has become  available.  To  facilitate  this
    feedback we  offer, on  the ExPASY  WWW server,  a form  that allows  the
    submission of updates and/or corrections to SWISS-PROT:

                 http://www.expasy.ch/sprot/sp_update_form.html

    It is also possible, from any entry in SWISS-PROT displayed by the ExPASy
    server, to  submit updates  and/or corrections for that particular entry.
    Finally, you  can also  send your  comments by  electronic  mail  to  the
    address:

                             swiss-prot@expasy.ch

    Note that  from January  1999, all  update requests  will be  assigned  a
    unique  identifier   of the form  'UR-Xnnnn'  (example:  UR-A0123).  This
    identifier will be used internally by the SWISS-PROT staff at SIB and EBI
    to track  down the  fate of  requests and  will also  be  used  in  email
    exchanges with the persons having submitted a request.



                        10. IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENT


    It became  obvious in the last years that the tremendous increase in data
    flow has created a requirement for resources which cannot be addressed in
    full by  public funding.  This is  causing databases  to fall  behind the
    research. We  believe that the only solution to the resource shortfall is
    to ask  commercial users  to participate  by paying a license fee. No fee
    will be charged to academic users, nor will any restriction be imposed on
    their use or reuse of the data. Both SWISS-PROT and PROSITE are concerned
    by these changes, while this is not the case of ENZYME.

    A document  fully describing  what will  be the impact of this change for
    SWISS-PROT is  available with  the SWISS-PROT  distribution files  on FTP
    (sp_info.txt). You can also access the document as well as other relevant
    ones from:

                         http://www.expasy.ch/announce/
                         http://www.ebi.ac.uk/news.html

    If you  do not  have the  time to  read this document, the most important
    take-home message is that these changes should not have any impact on the
    way SWISS-PROT  or PROSITE  are accessed or redistributed. Academic users
    will not be affected by these changes. Industrial end-users will also not
    directly be  affected as long as their employer pays the license fee. The
    same holds  true  for  bioinformatics  companies.  Academic  software  or
    database  developers  as  well  as  providers  of  database  distribution
    services will  be only minimally affected by these changes. We hope to be
    able to  keep the  spirit of SWISS-PROT and PROSITE alive and at the same
    time ensure  their long-term  financial survival.  We sincerely  hope and
    believe that  in the next two years the only change that will matter will
    be the increase in scope and timeliness of the databases.


    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
    SWISS-PROT is copyright.  It is produced through a collaboration between the
    Swiss Institute  of  Bioinformatics   and the EMBL Outstation - the European
    Bioinformatics Institute. There are no restrictions on its use by non-profit
    institutions as long as its  content is in no way modified. Usage by and for
    commercial entities requires a license agreement.  For information about the
    licensing  scheme  see: http://www.isb-sib.ch/announce/ or send  an email to
    license@isb-sib.ch.
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

       ========================================================================


                             APPENDIX A: SOME STATISTICS


       A.1  Amino acid composition

            A.1.1  Composition in percent for the complete data bank

       Ala (A) 7.58   Gln (Q) 3.97   Leu (L) 9.42   Ser (S) 7.12
       Arg (R) 5.16   Glu (E) 6.37   Lys (K) 5.95   Thr (T) 5.67
       Asn (N) 4.45   Gly (G) 6.84   Met (M) 2.37   Trp (W) 1.23
       Asp (D) 5.28   His (H) 2.24   Phe (F) 4.09   Tyr (Y) 3.18
       Cys (C) 1.66   Ile (I) 5.81   Pro (P) 4.90   Val (V) 6.58

       Asx (B) 0.001  Glx (Z) 0.001  Xaa (X) 0.01


            A.1.2  Classification of the amino acids by their frequency

       Leu, Ala, Ser, Gly, Val, Glu, Lys, Ile, Thr, Asp, Arg, Pro, Asn, Phe,
       Gln, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp



       A.2  Repartition of the sequences by their organism of origin

       Total number of species represented in this release of SWISS-PROT: 6307

       The first twenty species represent 36880 sequences: 47.3 % of the total
       number of entries.


       A.2.1 Table of the frequency of occurrence of species

            Species represented 1x: 2929
                                2x:  984
                                3x:  503
                                4x:  340
                                5x:  244
                                6x:  216
                                7x:  161
                                8x:  116
                                9x:  107
                               10x:   65
                           11- 20x:  297
                           21- 50x:  185
                           51-100x:   74
                             >100x:   86


       A.2.2  Table of the most represented species

        Number   Frequency     Species
             1        5146     Human
             2        4806     Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
             3        4476     Escherichia coli
             4        3387     Mouse
             5        2550     Rat
             6        2046     Bacillus subtilis
             7        1956     Caenorhabditis elegans
             8        1701     Haemophilus influenzae
             9        1406     Fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
            10        1307     Methanococcus jannaschii
            11        1126     Bovine
            12        1064     Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
            13         918     Mycobacterium tuberculosis
            14         862     Chicken
            15         792     Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse-ear cress)
            16         723     Salmonella typhimurium
            17         711     African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis)
            18         670     Synechocystis sp. (strain PCC 6803)
            19         651     Pig
            20         582     Rabbit
            21         490     Mycoplasma pneumoniae
            22         470     Mycoplasma genitalium
            23         428     Maize
            24         403     Rhizobium sp. (strain NGR234)
            25         367     Helicobacter pylori
            26         363     Pseudomonas aeruginosa
            27         332     Rice
            28         296     Dog
            29         295     Tobacco
            30         285     Slime mold (Dictyostelium discoideum)
            31         274     Treponema pallidum
            32         272     Bacteriophage T4
            33         268     Sheep
            34         262     Mycobacterium leprae
            35         260     Borrelia burgdorferi
            36         256     Pea
            37         253     Vaccinia virus (strain Copenhagen)
            38         235     Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum
                       235     Soybean
            40         224     Neurospora crassa
            41         222     Staphylococcus aureus
            42         221     Barley
            43         219     Porphyra purpurea
            44         209     Wheat
            45         203     Tomato
            46         201     Rhodobacter capsulatus
            47         199     Potato
            48         198     Klebsiella pneumoniae
            49         194     Candida albicans
            50         193     Human cytomegalovirus (strain AD169)
            51         192     Bacillus stearothermophilus
            52         189     Archaeoglobus fulgidus
                       189     Pseudomonas putida
            54         186     Vaccinia virus (strain WR)
            55         170     Agrobacterium tumefaciens
            56         169     Spinach
            57         166     Guinea pig
            58         159     Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
            59         158     Rhizobium meliloti
            60         154     Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus
            61         150     Aspergillus nidulans
                       150     Marchantia polymorpha (Liverwort)
            63         148     Streptomyces coelicolor
                       148     Guillardia theta (Cryptomonas phi)
            65         147     Cyanophora paradoxa
            66         146     Variola virus
            67         144     Golden hamster
            68         143     Horse
            69         140     Lactococcus lactis (subsp. lactis)
            70         139     Odontella sinensis
            71         134     Orgyia pseudotsugata multicapsid polyhedrosis virus
            72         132     Kluyveromyces lactis
            73         127     Trypanosoma brucei brucei
            74         126     Synechococcus sp. (strain PCC 7942)
            75         125     Thermus aquaticus (subsp. thermophilus)
            76         120     Alcaligenes eutrophus
            77         115     Bombyx mori (Silk moth)
                       115     Anabaena sp. (strain PCC 7120)
            79         114     Bradyrhizobium japonicum
            80         109     Yersinia enterocolitica
            81         107     Streptococcus pneumoniae
            82         105     Brachydanio rerio (Zebrafish)
            83         104     Oncorhynchus mykiss (Rainbow trout)
                       104     Brassica napus (Rape)
            85         102     Rhodobacter sphaeroides
            86         101     Cat



       A.3  Repartition of the sequences by size

                   From   To  Number             From   To   Number
                      1-  50    3186             1001-1100      708
                     51- 100    6584             1101-1200      537
                    101- 150    9506             1201-1300      365
                    151- 200    7467             1301-1400      246
                    201- 250    7006             1401-1500      202
                    251- 300    6508             1501-1600      127
                    301- 350    6115             1601-1700      115
                    351- 400    6164             1701-1800       86
                    401- 450    4707             1801-1900       93
                    451- 500    4450             1901-2000       62
                    501- 550    3351             2001-2100       34
                    551- 600    2258             2101-2200       68
                    601- 650    1768             2201-2300       70
                    651- 700    1292             2301-2400       35
                    701- 750    1146             2401-2500       41
                    751- 800     941             >2500          222
                    801- 850     740
                    851- 900     781
                    901- 950     536
                    951-1000     460



       A.4  Longest sequences

       The longest sequences (>=4000 residues) are listed here:

                                  HTS1_COCCA  5217
                                  MUC2_HUMAN  5179
                                  FAT_DROME   5147
                                  RYNR_RABIT  5037
                                  RYNR_PIG    5035
                                  RYNR_HUMAN  5032
                                  RYNC_RABIT  4969
                                  LRP_CAEEL   4753
                                  DYHC_DICDI  4725
                                  PLEC_RAT    4687
                                  LRP2_RAT    4660
                                  LRP2_HUMAN  4655
                                  DYHC_RAT    4644
                                  DYHC_DROME  4639
                                  DYHC_CAEEL  4568
                                  DYHB_CHLRE  4568
                                  APB_HUMAN   4563
                                  APOA_HUMAN  4548
                                  LRP1_HUMAN  4544
                                  LRP1_CHICK  4543
                                  DYHC_PARTE  4540
                                  RRPA_CVMJH  4488
                                  DYHG_CHLRE  4485
                                  DYHC_ANTCR  4466
                                  DYHC_TRIGR  4466
                                  GRSB_BACBR  4451
                                  PKSK_BACSU  4447
                                  PKSL_BACSU  4427
                                  PGBM_HUMAN  4393
                                  YP73_CAEEL  4385
                                  DYHC_NEUCR  4367
                                  DYHC_NECHA  4349
                                  DYHC_EMENI  4344
                                  PKD1_HUMAN  4303
                                  DYHC_SCHPO  4196
                                  DYHC_YEAST  4092
                                  RRPA_CVH22  4085
                                  RRPL_DUGBV  4036


       A.5  Statistics for journal citations


       Total number of journals cited in this release of SWISS-PROT: 955


       A.5.1 Table of the frequency of journal citations

            Journals cited 1x: 351
                           2x: 130
                           3x:  79
                           4x:  43
                           5x:  33
                           6x:  26
                           7x:  15
                           8x:  17
                           9x:  15
                          10x:  12
                      11- 20x:  66
                      21- 50x:  67
                      51-100x:  25
                        >100x:  76


       A.5.2  List of the most cited journals in SWISS-PROT

       Nb    Citations       Journal abbreviation
       --    ---------       ----------------------------------
        1    6476            J. Biol. Chem.
        2    3931            Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
        3    3418            Nucleic Acids Res.
        4    2815            J. Bacteriol.
        5    2606            Gene
        6    2119            FEBS Lett.
        7    1994            Eur. J. Biochem.
        8    1843            Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
        9    1811            Biochemistry
       10    1751            EMBO J.
       11    1650            Nature
       12    1484            Biochim. Biophys. Acta
       13    1398            J. Mol. Biol.
       14    1264            Cell
       15    1214            Mol. Cell. Biol.
       16     981            Mol. Gen. Genet.
       17     973            Plant Mol. Biol.
       18     941            Genomics
       19     922            Biochem. J.
       20     833            Science
       21     811            Mol. Microbiol.
       22     778            Virology
       23     702            J. Biochem.
       24     525            J. Virol.
       25     482            Yeast
       26     472            J. Cell Biol.
       27     464            J. Gen. Virol.
       28     452            Plant Physiol.
       29     431            Hum. Mutat.
       30     419            Genes Dev.
       31     402            Hum. Mol. Genet.
       32     355            J. Immunol.
       33     344            Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
       34     339            Infect. Immun.
       35     324            Curr. Genet.
       36     322            Oncogene
       37     309            Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.
       38     295            FEMS Microbiol. Lett.
       39     291            Structure
       40     269            Am. J. Hum. Genet.
       41     264            Biol. Chem. Hoppe-Seyler
       42     261            Nat. Genet.
       43     250            Development
       44     244            J. Clin. Invest.
       45     238            Mol. Endocrinol.
       46     238            Microbiology
       47     225            J. Mol. Evol.
       48     220            J. Gen. Microbiol.
       49     220            Genetics
       50     219            Nat. Struct. Biol.
       51     213            Hoppe-Seyler's Z. Physiol. Chem.
       52     200            DNA Cell Biol.
       53     199            Hum. Genet.
       54     196            Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
       55     186            J. Exp. Med.
       56     183            Blood
       57     182            Dev. Biol.
       58     176            Protein Sci.
       59     175            Neuron
       60     154            Immunogenetics
       61     152            DNA
       62     146            Endocrinology
       63     146            DNA Seq.
       64     136            Plant Cell
       65     122            Cancer Res.
       66     116            Plant J.
       67     116            Hemoglobin
       68     115            Bioorg. Khim.
       69     115            Biochimie
       70     112            Mol. Biol. Evol.
       71     112            J. Neurochem.
       72     109            Virus Res.
       73     109            Agric. Biol. Chem.
       74     107            Comp. Biochem. Physiol.
       75     106            Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res.
       76     101            Mech. Dev.


       ========================================================================


       APPENDIX B: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN SWISS-PROT AND SOME BIOMOLECULAR
                   DATABASES

       The current  status of  the relationships (cross-references) between
       SWISS-PROT and some biomolecular databases is shown in the following
       schematic:


                             ***********************
                             *  EMBL Nucleotide    *
                             *  Sequence Database  *
                             *       [EBI]         *
                             ***********************
                               ^ ^ ^  ^  ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * FlyBase        * <-------+ | |  I  | | | | +-------> * MGD [Mouse]        *
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
                               | | |  I  | | | | |
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * SubtiList      * <---------+ |  I  | | | +---------> * GCRDb [7TM recep.] *
    * [B.subtilis]   *         | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************         | | |  I  | | | | |
                               | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************         | | |  I  | | +-----------> * EcoGene [E.coli]   *
    * Mendel [Plant] * <-----+ | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************       | | | |  I  | | | | |
                             | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************       | | | |  I  +---------------> * SGD [Yeast]        *
    * MaizeDb        * <-----------+  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * [Zea mays]     *       | | | |  I  | | | | |
    ******************       | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
                             | | | |  I  | +-------------> * DictyDB [D.disco.] *
    ******************       | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    * WormPep        *       | | | |  I  | | | | |
    * [C.elegans]    * <---+ | | | |  I  | | | | |         **********************
    ******************     | | | | |  I  | | | | | +-----> * ENZYME [Nomencl.]  *
                           | | | | |  I  | | | | | |       **********************
    ******************     | v v v v  v  v v v v v v           v
    * REBASE         *     *************************       **********************
    * [Restriction   * <-- *   SWISS-PROT          * ----> * OMIM [Human]       *
    *  enzymes]      *     *   Protein Sequence    *       **********************
    ******************     *   Data Bank           *
                           *************************       **********************
    ******************      ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ | ^ ^ ^          * ECO2DBASE     [2D] *
    * StyGene        *      | | | | | | | | | | +--------> **********************
    * [S.Typhimurium]* <----+ | | | | | | | | |
    ******************        | | | | | | | | |            **********************
                              | | | | | | | | +----------> * Maize-2DPAGE  [2D] *
    ******************        | | | | | | | |              **********************
    * TRANSFAC       * <------+ | | | | | | |
    ******************          | | | | | | |              **********************
                                | | | | | | +------------> * SWISS-2DPAGE  [2D] *
    ******************          | | | | | |                **********************
    * Harefield [2D] * <--------+ | | | | |
    ******************            | | | | |                **********************
                                  | | | | +--------------> * Aarhus/Ghent  [2D] *
    ******************            | | | |                  **********************
    * PROSITE        *            | | | |
    * [Patterns and  * <----------+ | | +----------------> **********************
    * profiles]      *              | |                    * YEPD [Yeast]  [2D] *
    ******************              | +----------------+   **********************
                 |                  v                  |
                 |          ***********************    +-> **********************
                 +--------> * PDB [3D structures] * <----- * HSSP [3D similar.] *
                            ***********************        **********************

       =End=of=SWISS-PROT=release=37=notes=====================================
