---
title: TrEMBL release 6.0
categories: tr-major
---

                                TREMBL Release Notes
                                Release 6, June 1998


            EMBL Outstation
            European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
            Wellcome Trust Genome Campus
            Hinxton
            Cambridge CB10 1SD
            United Kingdom

            Telephone: (+44 1223) 494 400
            Fax: (+44 1223) 494 468
            Electronic mail address: DATALIB@EBI.AC.UK
            WWW server: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/

            Amos Bairoch
            Medical Biochemistry Department
            Centre Medical Universitaire
            1211 Geneva 4
            Switzerland

            Telephone: (+41 22) 784 40 82
            Fax: (+41 22) 702 55 02
            Electronic mail address: BAIROCH@CMU.UNIGE.CH
            WWW server: http://www.expasy.ch/


      INTRODUCTION
      ============

      TREMBL is a protein sequence database supplementing the SWISS-PROT
      Protein Sequence Data Bank. TREMBL contains the translations of all
      coding sequences (CDS) present in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence
      Database not yet integrated in SWISS-PROT. TREMBL can be considered
      as a preliminary section of SWISS-PROT. For all TREMBL entries
      which should finally be upgraded to the standard SWISS-PROT
      quality, SWISS-PROT accession numbers have been assigned.


      RELEASE 6.0 OF TREMBL
      =====================

      This TREMBL release is created from the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database
      release 54 and contains 177'757 sequence entries, comprising 48'796'878
      amino acids.

      TREMBL is split in two main sections; SP-TREMBL and REM-TREMBL:

      SP-TREMBL (SWISS-PROT TREMBL) contains the entries (150'329) which should be
      eventually incorporated into SWISS-PROT. SWISS-PROT accession numbers have
      been assigned for all SP-TREMBL entries.

      SP-TREMBL is organized in subsections:

      arc.dat (Archea):               5556 entries  (new section)
      fun.dat (Fungi):                4781 entries
      hum.dat (Human):                6312 entries
      inv.dat (Invertebrates):       20364 entries
      mam.dat (Other Mammals):        2450 entries
      mhc.dat (MHC proteins):         3524 entries
      org.dat (Organelles):          11685 entries
      phg.dat (Bacteriophages):       1240 entries
      pln.dat (Plants):              11217 entries
      pro.dat (Prokaryotes):         32000 entries
      rod.dat (Rodents):              5913 entries
      unc.dat (Unclassified):           88 entries
      vrl.dat (Viruses):             41882 entries
      vrt.dat (Other Vertebrates):    3317 entries

      REM-TREMBL (REMaining TREMBL) contains the entries (27'428) that we do
      not want to include in SWISS-PROT.


      WEEKLY UPDATES OF TREMBL AND NON-REDUNDANT DATA SETS
      ====================================================

      Weekly cumulative updates of TREMBL are available by anonymous FTP and
      from the EBI SRS server.

      We also produce every week a complete non-redundant protein sequence
      collection by providing three compressed files (these are in the directory
      /pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb on the EBI FTP server):
      sprot.dat.Z, trembl.dat.Z and trembl_new.dat.Z.


      ACCESS/DATA DISTRIBUTION
      ========================

      FTP server:     ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl
      SRS server:     http://srs.ebi.ac.uk:5000/

      TREMBL is also available on the SWISS-PROT CD-ROM.
      SWISS-PROT + TREMBL is searchable on the FASTA3, BLAST2 and Bic_sw servers
      of the EBI.

      TREMBL HAS BEEN PREPARED BY:
      ============================

      Rolf Apweiler, Christian Desaintes, Sergio Contrino, Wolfgang Fleischmann,
      Henning Hermjakob, Vivien Junker, Stephanie Kappus, Fiona Lang, Michele
      Magrane, Maria Jesus Martin, Steffen Moeller, Nicoletta Mitaritonna and
      Claire O'Donovan at the EMBL Outstation - European Bioinformatics Institute
      (EBI) in Hinxton, UK;
      Amos Bairoch and Alain Gateau at the Medical Biochemistry Department of
      the University of Geneva, Switzerland.

      Notes
      =====

      This manual and the database it accompanies may be copied and redistributed
      freely, without advance permission, provided that this statement is reproduced
      with each copy.


      Citation
      ========

     If you  want to  cite  TREMBL  in  a  publication  please  use  the following
     reference:

               Bairoch A., and Apweiler R.
               The SWISS-PROT protein sequence data bank and its
               supplement TREMBL in 1998.
               Nucleic Acids Res. 26:38-42(1998).
