---
title: TrEMBL release 19.0
categories: tr-major
---

                                  TrEMBL Release Notes
                                  Release 19, December 2001

        EMBL Outstation
        European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
        Wellcome Trust Genome Campus
        Hinxton
        Cambridge CB10 1SD
        United Kingdom

        Telephone: (+44 1223) 494 444
        Fax: (+44 1223) 494 468
        Electronic mail address: DATALIB@EBI.AC.UK
        WWW server: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/

        Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)
        Centre Medical Universitaire
        1, rue Michel Servet
        1211 Geneva 4
        Switzerland

        Telephone: (+41 22) 702 50 50
        Fax: (+41 22) 702 58 58
        Electronic mail address: Amos.Bairoch@isb-sib.ch
        WWW server: http://www.expasy.org/


        Acknowledgements

        TrEMBL has been prepared by:

        o  Rolf Apweiler, Kirsty Bates, Margaret Biswas, Sergio Contrino,
           Daniel Barrell, Kirill Degtyarenko, Wolfgang Fleischmann, Gill Fraser,
           Henning Hermjakob, Kati Laiho, Alexander Kanapin, Youla Karavidopoulou,
           Paul Kersey, Minna Lehvaslaiho, Michele Magrane, Maria Jesus Martin,
           Virginie Mittard, Nicola Mulder, Claire O'Donovan, John F. O'Rourke,
           Eleanor Whitfield and Allyson Williams at the EMBL Outstation -
           European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) in Hinxton, UK;
        o  Amos Bairoch, Alain Gateau, Isabelle Phan and Sandrine Pilbout at the
           Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics in Geneva, Switzerland.

        Copyright Notice
        TrEMBL copyright (c) 2000 EMBL-EBI
        This manual and the database it accompanies may be copied and
        redistributed freely, without advance permission, provided
        that this copyright statement is reproduced with each copy.

        Citation

        If you  want to  cite  TrEMBL  in  a  publication  please  use  the
        following reference:


                  Bairoch A., and Apweiler R.
                  The SWISS-PROT protein sequence data bank and its supplement
                  TrEMBL in 2000.
                  Nucl. Acids Res. 28:45-48(2000).


                             1. Introduction


    TrEMBL is a computer-annotated protein sequence database supplementing the
    SWISS-PROT Protein Knowledgebase. TrEMBL contains the translations of
    all coding sequences (CDS) present in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database
    not yet integrated in SWISS-PROT. TrEMBL can be considered as a preliminary
    section of SWISS-PROT. For all TrEMBL entries which should finally be
    upgraded to the standard SWISS-PROT quality, SWISS-PROT accession numbers
    have been assigned.

                            2. Why a supplement to SWISS-PROT?

    The ongoing gene sequencing and mapping projects have dramatically
    increased the number of protein sequences to be incorporated into SWISS-PROT.
    We do not want to dilute the quality standards of SWISS-PROT by incorporating
    sequences without proper sequence analysis and annotation, but we do want to
    make the sequences available as fast as possible. TrEMBL achieves this second
    goal, and is a major step in the process of speeding up subsequent
    upgrading of annotation to the standard SWISS-PROT quality.
    To address the problem of redundancy, the translations of all coding
    sequences (CDS) in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database already included
    in SWISS-PROT have been removed from TrEMBL.


                                 3. The Release

    This TrEMBL release was created from the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database
    release 68 and updates until 16.11.01 and contains 636'825 entries
    and 184'332'036 amino acids. To minimize redundancy, the translations of all
    coding sequences (CDS) in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database already
    included in SWISS-PROT release 40 and updates until 13.12.01 have been
    removed from TrEMBL release 19

    TrEMBL is split in two main sections: SP-TrEMBL and REM-TrEMBL:
    SP-TrEMBL (SWISS-PROT TrEMBL) contains the entries (562'222) which should be
    eventually incorporated into SWISS-PROT. SWISS-PROT accession numbers have
    been assigned for all SP-TrEMBL entries.

    SP-TrEMBL is organized in subsections:

    arc.dat (Archaea):                        1692 entries
    arp.dat (Complete Archaeal proteomes):   19590 entries
    fun.dat (Fungi):                         13339 entries
    hum.dat (Human):                         29064 entries
    inv.dat (Invertebrates):                 60611 entries
    mam.dat (Other Mammals):                  9724 entries
    mhc.dat (MHC proteins):                   7434 entries
    org.dat (Organelles):                    50792 entries
    phg.dat (Bacteriophages):                 4368 entries
    pln.dat (Plants):                        58841 entries
    pro.dat (Prokaryotes):                   69426 entries
    prp.dat (Complete Prokaryote Proteomes): 74477 entries
    rod.dat (Rodents):                       24185 entries
    unc.dat (Unclassified):                    252 entries
    vrl.dat (Viruses):                       60309 entries
    vrt.dat (Other Vertebrates):             11003 entries
    vrv.dat (Retroviruses):                  67115 entries

    80'772 new entries have been integrated in SP-TrEMBL. The sequences of
    1388 SP-TrEMBL entries have been updated and the annotation has been
    updated in 321'110 entries.

    In the document deleteac.txt, you will find a list of all accession numbers
    which were previously present in TrEMBL, but which have now been deleted from
    the database.

    REM-TrEMBL (REMaining TrEMBL) contains the entries (74'603) that we do
    not want to include in SWISS-PROT. REM-TrEMBL entries have no accession
    numbers. This section is organized in six subsections:

       1) Immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors (Immuno.dat)
          Most REM-TrEMBL entries are  immunoglobulins and  T-cell receptors. We
          stopped entering immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors into SWISS-PROT,
          because we only want to keep  the  germ line gene derived translations
          of these proteins in SWISS-PROT and not all known somatic recombinated
          variations of  these proteins.  We would like to  create a specialized
          database  dealing  with  these  sequences  as a further  supplement to
          SWISS-PROT  and  keep  only a  representative  cross-section of  these
          proteins in SWISS-PROT.

       2) Synthetic sequences (Synth.dat)
          Another category of data, which will not be included in SWISS-PROT are
          synthetic sequences.  Again, we do not want to  leave these entries in
          TrEMBL. Ideally one should build a specialized database for artificial
          sequences as a further supplement to SWISS-PROT.

       3) Patent application sequences (Patent.dat)
          A third  subsection consists of  coding sequences captured from patent
          applications.  A thorough  survey of  these  entries  have shown  that
          apart from a rather small minority  (which in  most cases have already
          been integrated in SWISS-PROT), most of these sequences contain either
          erroneous data or concern artificially generated sequences outside the
          scope of SWISS-PROT.

       4) Small fragments (Smalls.dat)
          Another  subsection  consists of fragments  with less than eight amino
          acids.

       5) CDS not coding for real proteins (Pseudo.dat)
          This subsection consists of CDS translations where we have strong
          evidence to believe that these CDS are not coding for real proteins.

       6) Truncated proteins (Truncated.dat)
          The last subsection consists of truncated proteins which result from
          events like mutations introducing a stop codon leading to the truncation
          of the protein product.


                    4. Format Differences Between SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL

    The format and conventions used by TrEMBL follow as closely as possible
    that of SWISS-PROT. Hence, it is not necessary to produce an additional
    user manual and extensive release notes for TrEMBL. The information given
    in the SWISS-PROT release notes and user manual are in general valid for
    TrEMBL. The differences are mentioned below.

    The general structure of an entry is identical in SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL.
    The data class used in TrEMBL (in the ID line) is always 'PRELIMINARY',
    whereas in SWISS-PROT it is always 'STANDARD'.

    Differences in line types present in SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL:

    The ID line (IDentification):

    The entry name used in SP-TrEMBL is the same as the Accession Number of the
    entry. The entry name used in REM-TrEMBL is the stable part of the protein_id
    tagged to the corresponding CDS in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database.
    'protein_id' stands for the "Protein Identification" number. It is a number
    that you will find in the feature table of the EMBL nucleotide sequence
    entries in a qualifier called "/protein_id" which is tagged to every CDS.

    Example:

    FT   CDS             339..1514
    FT                   /codon_start=1
    FT                   /db_xref="PID:g1256015"
    FT                   /product="dystrobrevin-epsilon"
    FT                   /protein_id="AAC50431.1"

    The protein_id is defined as follows in the The DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank Feature Table
    Definition documentation
    Qualifier          /protein_id
    Definition         Protein Identifier, issued by International collaborators.
                       This qualifier consists of a stable ID portion (3+5 format
                       with 3 position letters and 5 numbers) plus a version
                       number after the decimal point.

    Value format       <identifier>
    Example            /protein_id="AAA12345.1"
    Comment            When the protein sequence encoded by the CDS changes, only
                       the version number of the /protein_id value is incremented.
                       The stable part of the /protein_id remains unchanged and
                       as a result will permanently be associated with a given
                       protein. This qualifier is valid only on CDS features
                       which translate into a valid protein.


    The DT line (DaTe)

    The format of the DT lines that serve to indicate when an entry was
    created and updated are identical to that defined in SWISS-PROT; but the
    DT lines in TrEMBL refer to the TrEMBL release. The difference is
    shown in the example below.

        DT lines in a SWISS-PROT entry:

        DT   01-JAN-1988 (Rel. 06, Created)
        DT   01-JUL-1989 (Rel. 11, Last sequence update)
        DT   01-AUG-1992 (Rel. 23, Last annotation update)

        DT lines in a TrEMBL entry:

        DT   01-NOV-1996 (TrEMBLrel. 01, Created)
        DT   01-NOV-1996 (TrEMBLrel. 01, Last sequence update)
        DT   01-FEB-1997 (TrEMBLrel. 02, Last annotation update)


                    5. Weekly updates of TrEMBL and non-redundant data sets

    Weekly cumulative updates of TrEMBL are available by anonymous FTP and
    from the EBI SRS server.

    We also produce every week a complete non-redundant protein sequence
    collection by providing three compressed files (these are in the directory
    /pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb on the EBI FTP server and in databases/sp_tr_nrdb
    on the ExPASy server): sprot.dat.gz, trembl.dat.gz and trembl_new.dat.gz.
    This set of non-redundant files is especially important for two types of
    users:
    (i) Managers of similarity search services. They can now provide what is
    currently the most comprehensive and non-redundant data set of protein
    sequences.
    (ii) Anybody wanting to update their full copy of SWISS-PROT + TrEMBL to
    their own schedule without having to wait for full releases of SWISS-PROT
    or of TrEMBL.

    We also recently introduced Varsplic Expand which is a program to generate
    "expanded" sequences from SWISS-PROT records i.e. sequences including the
    variants specified by the varsplic, variant and conflict annotations. New
    records are produced in either pseudo-SWISS-PROT or FASTA format for each
    specified variant. More information and the data is available at
    ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb/


                    6. Access/Data Distribution

    FTP server:     ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl
    SRS server:     http://srs.ebi.ac.uk/

    TrEMBL is also available on the SWISS-PROT CD-ROM.
    SWISS-PROT + TrEMBL is searchable on the following servers at the EBI:

    FASTA3  (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/fasta33/)
    BLAST2  (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/blast2/)
    Bic_sw  (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/bic_sw/)
    Scanps  (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/scanps/)
    MPSrch  (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/MPsrch/)


     7. Description of changes made to TrEMBL since release 18

    7.1 Changes concerning cross-references (DR line)

        We have added crossreferences from TrEMBL to a number of new databases.

        7.1.1 MEROPS, the protease database, available at http://www.merops.co.uk

        7.1.2 ANU-2DPAGE, the Australian National University Two-Dimensional
              Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis Database, available at
              http://semele.anu.edu.au/2d/2d.html

        7.1.3 PHCI-2DPAGE, the two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
              database at Universidad Complutense de Madrid, available at
              http://babbage.csc.ucm.es/2d/2d.html

        7.1.4 PMMA-2DPAGE, the Purkyne Military Medical Academy 2D-PAGE database,
              available at http://www.pmma.pmfhk.cz/2d/2d.html

        7.1.5 Siena-2DPAGE, the 2D-PAGE database from the Department of Molecular
              Biology, University of Siena, Italy, available at
              http://www.bio-mol.unisi.it/2d/2d.html

    A list of all crossreferences in TrEMBL to other databases is provided below:
    EMBL
    PIR
    PDB
    HSSP
    MEROPS
    REBASE
    TRANSFAC
    Aarhus/Ghent-2DPAGE
    ANU-2DPAGE
    COMPLUYEAST-2DPAGE
    PHCI-2DPAGE
    PMMA-2DPAGE
    Siena-2DPAGE
    FlyBase
    Leproma
    MIM
    MGD
    MypuList
    SGD
    SubtiList
    TIGR
    TubercuList
    WormPep
    ZFIN
    InterPro
    Pfam
    PRINTS
    ProDom
    SMART
    PROSITE

    7.2 New database divisions:

        Three new database divisions were created as previously announced
        to reflect the specialised attention we are giving to complete
        proteomes and the HAMAP project. The new viral division is for
        operational reasons:

        7.2.1 New database division 'arp'
       It will contain archaeal complete proteome entries.
        7.2.2 New database division 'prp'
       It will contain bacterial complete proteome entries.
        7.2.3 New database division 'vrv'
       It will contain retrovirus entries.


     8. Planned changes


    8.1 Evidence tags:

        We are continuing with the introduction of evidence tags to SWISS-PROT and
        TrEMBL entries. The aim of this is to allow users to see where data items
        came from and to enable SWISS-PROT staff to automatically update data if
        the underlying evidence changes. This is ongoing internally and we hope
        to provide a public version early in 2002. For more information,
        please see
        ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl/evidenceDocumentation.html
        We would welcome any feedback from the user community.

    8.2 Conversion of TrEMBL to mixed case:

        Most of the DE (DEscription), GN (Gene Name) and RC (Reference Comment)
        lines is being converted to mixed case internally. The conversion is
        ongoing and will be made public when ready.

    8.3 Version of SWISS-PROT/TrEMBL in XML format:

        A distribution version of SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL in XML format is
        being developed. The specifications of this new format will be described
        when it will be first implemented in TrEMBL.

    8.4 Multiple RP lines:

        In the workreleases from release 19 onwards, there can be more than one
        RP (Reference Position) line per reference in a TrEMBL entry. For more
        information on this development, please read SWISS-PROT Protein
        Knowledgebase Release Notes 40 at http://www.expasy.org/sprot/relnotes
      
