---
title: Swiss-Prot release 41.0
categories: sp-major
---

      ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Swiss-Prot Protein Knowledgebase
                                                                 Release Notes
                                                     Release 41, February 2003
      ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                 Table of contents

     1   Introduction
     2   Description of the changes made to Swiss-Prot since release 40
     3   Forthcoming changes
     4   Status of the documentation files
     5   The ExPASy World-Wide Web server
     6   TrEMBL - a supplement to Swiss-Prot
     7   FTP access to Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL
     8   ENZYME and PROSITE
     9   We need your help!
     A   Appendix A


                                 1   Introduction

    Release 41.0 of Swiss-Prot contains 122'564 sequence entries, comprising
    44'986'459 amino acids abstracted from 103'486 references. This represents
    an increase of 20% over release 40.0. The growth of the database is
    summarized below.

          Release    Date   Number of   Number of
                             entries   amino acids
            2.0     09/86      3'939      900'163
            3.0     11/86      4'160      969'641
            4.0     04/87      4'387    1'036'010
            5.0     09/87      5'205    1'327'683
            6.0     01/88      6'102    1'653'982
            7.0     04/88      6'821    1'885'771
            8.0     08/88      7'724    2'224'465
            9.0     11/88      8'702    2'498'140
            10.0    03/89     10'008    2'952'613
            11.0    07/89     10'856    3'265'966
            12.0    10/89     12'305    3'797'482
            13.0    01/90     13'837    4'347'336
            14.0    04/90     15'409    4'914'264
            15.0    08/90     16'941    5'486'399
            16.0    11/90     18'364    5'986'949
            17.0    02/91     20'024    6'524'504
            18.0    05/91     20'772    6'792'034
            19.0    08/91     21'795    7'173'785
            20.0    11/91     22'654    7'500'130
            21.0    03/92     23'742    7'866'596
            22.0    05/92     25'044    8'375'696
            23.0    08/92     26'706    9'011'391
            24.0    12/92     28'154    9'545'427
            25.0    04/93     29'955   10'214'020
            26.0    07/93     31'808   10'875'091
            27.0    10/93     33'329   11'484'420
            28.0    02/94     36'000   12'496'420
            29.0    06/94     38'303   13'464'008
            30.0    10/94     40'292   14'147'368
            31.0    02/95     43'470   15'335'248
            32.0    11/95     49'340   17'385'503
            33.0    02/96     52'205   18'531'384
            34.0    10/96     59'021   21'210'389
            35.0    11/97     69'113   25'083'768
            36.0    07/98     74'019   26'840'295
            37.0    12/98     77'977   28'268'293
            38.0    07/99     80'000   29'085'965
            39.0    05/00     86'593   31'411'114
            40.0    10/01    101'602   37'315'215
            41.0    02/03    122'564   44'986'459


        2   Description of the changes made to Swiss-Prot since release 40

         2.1   Sequences and annotations

    21'133 sequences have been added since release 40, the sequence data of
    3'251 existing entries has been updated and the annotations of 57'525
    entries have been revised.


         2.2   The HPI project

    The Human Proteomics Initiative (HPI) puts a major effort on the annotation
    of all known human sequences according to the quality standards of
    Swiss-Prot. This means that, for each known protein, a wealth of
    information is provided, which includes the description of its function,
    its domain structure, subcellular location, post-translational
    modifications (PTMs), variants, similarities to other proteins, etc. This
    not only implies the annotation of newly detected proteins, but also the
    integration of new research data into the existing entries by specialized
    biologists, who are in close contact with experts all over the world.

    There are currently 9'172 annotated human sequences in Swiss-Prot.
    Up-to-date detailed statistics concerning the HPI project are available at:

         http://www.expasy.org/sprot/hpi/hpi_stat.html

    Simultaneously, two further efforts were increased: the description of
    human diseases associated with deficiency(ies) in the protein, and
    mammalian orthologs of human proteins are annotated at a level equivalent
    to that of the cognate human sequences.

    For all aspects of the HPI project, we would appreciate the help and
    collaboration of the scientific community. Information concerning the human
    proteome is highly critical to a large section of the life science
    community. We therefore appeal to the user community to fully participate
    in this initiative by providing all the necessary information to define and
    to speed up the comprehensive annotation of the human proteome.

    For a detailed description of the HPI project please consult:

         http://www.expasy.org/sprot/hpi/


         2.3   The HAMAP project

    The first complete microbial genome sequence was that of the bacterium
    Haemophilus influenzae, which became available in 1995. Since then, more
    than 100 bacterial and archaeal genomes have been sequenced and many more
    sequencing projects of pathogenic and nonpathogenic microbes are in
    progress. To date, the publicly available microbial genomes encode more
    than 230'000 different proteins.

    In order to handle the large amount of "raw" data coming from microbial
    genome sequencing, the High quality Automated Microbial Annotation of
    Proteomes (HAMAP) project was initiated. The project aims to automatically
    annotate a significant percentage of protein sequences, which originate
    from microbial genome sequencing projects.

    To maintain a high level quality of annotation, specific tools are
    developed to deal with two completely separate subsets of bacterial and
    archaeal proteins: proteins that have no recognizable similarity to any
    other microbial or non-microbial proteins ("ORFans") and proteins that are
    part of well-defined families or subfamilies. This is done by using a rule
    system that describes the level and extent of annotations that can be
    assigned by similarity with a prototype manually annotated entry. The
    result is a curated entry whose quality is identical to that produced
    manually by an expert annotator.

    Programs under development are designed to recognize protein peculiarities,
    and only proteins which match the defined criteria are processed
    automatically. Protein sequences which fail to fit into the rule system are
    further analyzed by Swiss-Prot expert annotators.

    For a detailed description of the HAMAP project and its current status
    please consult:

         http://www.expasy.org/sprot/hamap/

    and:

    Gattiker A., Michoud K., Rivoire C., Auchincloss A.H., Coudert E., Lima T.,
    Kersey P., Pagni M., Sigrist C.J.A., Lachaize C., Veuthey A.-L., Bairoch A.
    Automatic annotation of microbial proteomes in Swiss-Prot.
    Comput. Biol. Chem. 27:49-58(2003).


         2.4   What's happening with the model organisms?

    We have selected a number of organisms that are the target of genome
    sequencing and/or mapping projects and for which we intend to:

       * be as complete as possible. All sequences available at a given time
         should be immediately included in Swiss-Prot. This also includes
         sequence corrections and updates;
       * provide a higher level of annotation;
       * provide cross-references to specialized database(s) that contain,
         among other data, some information about the genes that code for these
         proteins;
       * provide specific indexes and documents.

    From our efforts to annotate human sequence entries as completely as
    possible arose the HPI project (see 2.2), and the bacterial model organisms
    became the focus of the HAMAP project (see 2.3). Here is the current status
    of the model organisms which are not covered by these two projects:

          Organism        Database           Index file      Number of
                          cross-references                   sequences
          ------------    ----------------   --------------  ---------
          A.thaliana      None yet           arath.txt           1'952
          C.albicans      None yet           calbican.txt          264
          C.elegans       Wormpep            celegans.txt        2'291
          D.discoideum    DictyDB            dicty.txt             316
          D.melanogaster  FlyBase            fly.txt             1'764
          M.musculus      MGD                mgdtosp.txt         6'169
          S.cerevisiae    SGD                yeast.txt           4'892
          S.pombe         GeneDB_SPombe      pombe.txt           2'116


         2.5   'Nucleomorph' added to the OrGanelle (OG) line

    The OG (OrGanelle) line indicates from which genome a gene for a protein
    originates. Until now, defined terms in the OG line where 'Chloroplast',
    'Cyanelle', 'Mitochondrion' and 'Plasmid'. The term 'Nucleomorph' has been
    added, which is the residual nucleus of an algal endosymbiont that resides
    inside its host cell.


         2.6   Progress in the conversion of Swiss-Prot to mixed-case
         characters

    We are gradually converting Swiss-Prot entries from all 'UPPER CASE' to
    'MiXeD CaSe'. With this release the RC (Reference Comment) line topic
    STRAIN and the CC line topic 'CATALYTIC ACTIVITY' have been converted.

    As described in section 3.2, the process of converting all of Swiss-Prot to
    mixed case continues.


         2.7   Multiple RP lines

    Starting with release 41, there can be more than one RP (Reference
    Position) line per reference in a Swiss-Prot entry. The RP line describes
    the extent of the work carried out by the authors of the reference, e.g.
    the type of molecule that has been sequenced, protein characterization, PTM
    characterization, protein structure analysis, variation detection, etc.

    As the number of experimental results per publication has increased over
    the years, the limitation of using a single RP line per reference no longer
    allowed to add all the information while maintaining a consistent format.
    Therefore we decided to permit multiple RP lines.

    Example:

    RP   SEQUENCE FROM N.A., SEQUENCE OF 23-42 AND 351-365, AND
    RP   CHARACTERIZATION.


         2.8   Changes concerning cross-references (DR line)

         2.8.1   Schizosaccharomyces pombe GeneDB database

    We have added cross-references to the Schizosaccharomyces pombe GeneDB
    database (available at http://www.genedb.org/genedb/pombe/index.jsp), which
    contains all S. pombe known and predicted protein coding genes, pseudogenes
    and tRNAs. It is hosted by the Sanger Institute.

    The identifiers of the appropriate DR line are:

     Data bank identifier: GeneDB_SPombe
     Primary identifier:   GeneDB's unique identifier for a S. pombe gene.
     Secondary identifier: None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:              DR   GeneDB_SPombe; SPAC9E9.12c; -.


         2.8.2   Genew

    We have added cross-references to the Human Gene Nomenclature Database
    Genew (available at http://www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/nomenclature/searchgenes.pl),
    which provides data for all human genes which have approved symbols. It is
    managed by the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC).

    The identifiers of the appropriate DR line are:

     Data bank identifier: Genew
     Primary identifier:   HGNC's unique identifier for a human gene
     Secondary identifier: HGNC's approved gene symbol.
     Example:              DR   Genew; HGNC:5217; HSD3B1.


         2.8.3   Gramene

    We have added cross-references to the Gramene database, a comparative
    mapping resource for grains (available at http://www.gramene.org/). The
    format for the explicit links are:

     Data bank
     identifier:           Gramene
     Primary identifier:   Unique identifier for a protein, which is identical
                           to the Swiss-Prot primary AC number of that protein.
     Secondary identifier: None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:              DR   Gramene; Q06967; -.


         2.8.4   HAMAP

    We have added cross-references to the collection of orthologous microbial
    protein families, generated manually by expert curators of the HAMAP
    (High-quality Automated and Manual Annotation of microbial Proteomes)
    project in the framework of the Swiss-Prot protein knowledgebase. The data
    is accessible at http://www.expasy.org/sprot/hamap/families.html.

    The identifiers of the appropriate DR line are:

     Data bank
     identifier:         HAMAP
     Primary identifier: HAMAP unique identifier for a microbial protein
                         family
     Secondary           The values are either '-', 'fused', 'atypical' or
     identifier:         'atypical/fused'. The value '-' is a placeholder for
                         an empty field; the 'fused' value indicates that the
                         family rule does not cover the entire protein; the
                         value 'atypical' points out that the protein is
                         divergent in sequence or has mutated functional
                         sites, and should not be included in family datasets.
                         The value 'atypical/fused' indicates both latter
                         findings.
     Tertiary            Number of domains found in the protein, generally
     identifier:         '1', rarely '2' for the fusion of 2 identical
                         domains.
     Example:            DR   HAMAP; MF_00012; -; 1.


         2.8.5   Phosphorylation Site Database

    We have added cross-references to the Phosphorylation Site Database,
    PhosSite (available at http://vigen.biochem.vt.edu/xpd/xpd.htm), which
    provides access to information from scientific literature concerning
    prokaryotic proteins that undergo covalent phosphorylation on the hydroxyl
    side chains of serine, threonine or tyrosine residues. The identifiers of
    the appropriate DR line are:

     Data bank identifier: PhosSite
     Primary identifier:   Unique identifier for a phosphoprotein, which is
                           identical to the Swiss-Prot primary AC number of
                           that protein.
     Secondary identifier: None; a dash '-' is stored in that field.
     Example:              DR   PhosSite; P00955; -.


         2.8.6   TIGRFAMs

    We have added cross-references to TIGRFAMs, a protein family database
    available at http://www.tigr.org/TIGRFAMs/. The identifiers of the
    appropriate DR line are:

     Data bank identifier: TIGRFAMs
     Primary identifier:   TIGRFAMs unique identifier for a protein family.
     Secondary identifier: TIGRFAMs entry name for a protein family.
     Tertiary identifier:  Number of hits found in the sequence.
     Example:              DR   TIGRFAMs; TIGR00630; uvra; 1.


         2.8.7   CarbBank

    We have removed the Swiss-Prot cross-references to CarbBank.


         2.8.8   GCRDb

    We have removed the Swiss-Prot cross-references to GCRDb.


         2.8.9   Mendel

    We have removed the Swiss-Prot cross-references to Mendel.


         2.8.10   YEPD

    We have removed the Swiss-Prot cross-references to the yeast
    electrophoresis protein database (YEPD).


         2.9   Explicit links to dbSNP in FT VARIANT lines of human sequence
         entries

    In human protein sequence entries we have introduced explicit links to the
    Single Nucleotide Polymorphism database (dbSNP) from the feature
    description of FT VARIANT keys. The format of such links is:

    FT   VARIANT    from     to       description (IN dbSNP:accession_number).
    FT                                /FTId=VAR_number.

    Example:

    FT   VARIANT      65     65       T -> I (IN dbSNP:1065419).
    FT                                /FTId=VAR_012009.


         2.10   Feature key 'SIMILAR' became obsolete

    The feature key 'SIMILAR' was used to describe the extent of a similarity
    with another protein sequence. Nowadays, most domains with similarity to
    other proteins are known regions described in domain and family databases,
    which are annotated in Swiss-Prot with the feature key 'DOMAIN' or 'REPEAT'
    and the comment (CC) line topic 'SIMILARITY'; thus the feature key
    'SIMILAR' became obsolete and will not be used again.


         2.11   Version of SP in XML format

    A distribution version of Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL in XML format is being
    developed. The first draft of the XML specification was released for public
    review on February 21, 2002.

    For more information see http://www.ebi.ac.uk/swissprot/SP-ML/.

    Please send comments and suggestions by electronic mail to sp-ml@ebi.ac.uk.


                              3   Forthcoming changes

     Please note that these are the last release notes in this format. In
     future, forthcoming changes and recent modifications are announced to
     users also between major Swiss-Prot releases. The distinct sections of
     this document will move to the following sites:

        * 2. Description of the changes made to Swiss-Prot since the last
          release: http://www.expasy.org/sprot/relnotes/sp_news.html. This new
          document contains all recent modifications in Swiss-Prot including
          minor changes with no impact on the work of software developpers.
          Thus this document contains more information than announced in the
          document 'sp_soon.html' (see below).
        * 3. Forthcoming changes:
          http://www.expasy.org/sprot/relnotes/sp_soon.html. All
          modifications, which have an impact on the Swiss-Prot format are
          announced in this document.
        * 4. Status of the documentation files:
          http://www.expasy.org/sprot/userman.html#documentation
        * 5. The ExPASy World-Wide Web server:
             o Explicit general and continuously updated documentation:
               http://www.expasy.org/doc/expasy.pdf
             o History of changes, improvements and new features:
               http://www.expasy.org/history.html
             o Swiss-Flash, a service that reports news of databases, software
               and service developments: http://www.expasy.org/swiss-flash/
        * 6. TrEMBL - a supplement to Swiss-Prot:
          ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl/relnotes.txt
        * 7. FTP access to Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL:
          http://www.expasy.org/sprot/userman.html#ftp and
          http://www.expasy.org/sprot/download.html
        * 8. ENZYME and PROSITE: Enzyme release notes (not yet) and
          http://www.expasy.org/prosite/psrelnot.html
        * Appendix A (Release statistics):
          http://www.expasy.org/sprot/relnotes/relstat.html
        * Appendix B (Relationships between Swiss-Prot and some biomolecular
          databases): http://www.expasy.org/sprot/userman.html#relship


         3.1   Extension of the entry name format

    We endeavor to assign meaningful entry names that facilitate the
    identification of the proteins and the species of origin. Currently the
    entry name consists of up to ten uppercase alphanumeric characters.
    Swiss-Prot uses a general purpose naming convention that can be symbolized
    as X_Y, where X is a mnemonic code of at most 4 alphanumeric characters
    representing the protein name, the '_' sign serves as a separator, and the
    Y is a mnemonic species identification code of at most 5 alphanumeric
    characters representing the biological source of the protein.

    We are planning to elongate the mnemonic code for the protein name from up
    to 4 characters to up to 5 characters. E.g. the mnemonic code for the
    meiotic recombination protein rec10 is currently 'RE10'. After the
    introduction of extended entry names it could be modified to the 5-letter
    code 'REC10'.


         3.2   Continuation of the conversion of Swiss-Prot to mixed-case
         characters

    We will continue to convert Swiss-Prot entries from all 'UPPER CASE' to
    'MiXeD CaSe'. We are proceeding in the conversion of CC (Comment) lines, we
    will start to convert the GN (Gene Name) lines to mixed case, but also any
    other line type might be effected.


         3.3    Reference Comment (RC) line topics may span lines

    The RC (Reference Comment) line store comments relevant to the reference
    cited, in currently 5 distinct topics: PLASMID, SPECIES, STRAIN, TISSUE and
    TRANSPOSON. It is not always possible to list all information within one
    line. Therefore we will allow multiple RC lines, in which one topic might
    span over a line. Example:

    RC   STRAIN=Various strains;

    could become

    RC   STRAIN=AZ.026, DC.005, GA.039, GA2181, IL.014, IN.018, KY.172, KY2.37,
    RC   LA.013, MN.001, MNb027, MS.040, NY.016, OH.036, TN.173, TN2.38,
    RC   UT.002, AL.012, AZ.180, MI.035, VA.015, and IL2.17;


         3.4   New format of comment line (CC) topics

    We are continuing a major overhaul of various comment line topics. We would
    like the majority of the information stored to be usable by computer
    programs (while remaining human-readable). We are therefore standardizing
    the format of the topics.


         3.4.1   ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS

    We are gradually restructuring the CC (comment) line topic ALTERNATIVE
    PRODUCTS and introducing unique identifiers for each described isoform.
    Qualifiers, which will be introduced are described in the table below:

      Topic        Description

      Event        Biological process that results in the
                   production of the alternative forms (Alternative
                   promoter, Alternative splicing, Alternative
                   initiation).

                   Format: Event=controlled vocabulary;
                   Example: Event=Alternative splicing;

      Named        Number of isoforms listed in the topics 'Name'
      isoforms     below the topic 'Event=Alternative splicing'.

                   Format: Named isoforms=number;
                   Example: Named isoforms=6;

      Comment      Any comments concerning one or more isoforms;
                   optional; may be longer than 1 line.

                   Format: Comment=free text;
                   Example: Comment=Experimental confirmation may
                                    be lacking for some isoforms;

      Name         A common name for an isoform used in the
                   literature or assigned by Swiss-Prot (currenty
                   only available for spliced isoforms).

                   Format: Name=common name;
                   Example: Name=Alpha;

      Synonyms     Synonyms for an isoform as used in the
                   literature; optional.

                   Format: Synonyms=synonym_1[, synonym_n];
                   Example: Synonyms=B, KL5;

      IsoId        Unique identifier for an isoform, consisting of
                   the Swiss-Prot accession number, followed by a
                   dash and an identifier for this isoform.

                   Format: IsoId=acc#-isoform_number[,acc#-isoform_number];
                   Example: IsoId=P05067-1;

      Sequence     Lists all FT VARSPLIC identifiers (VSP_#), which
                   are needed to build the sequence for a specific
                   isoform. If the accession number of the IsoId
                   does not correspond to the accession number of
                   the current entry, this topic contains the term
                   'External'.

                   Format: Sequence=VSP_#[,VSP_#]|Displayed|External|Not described;
                   Example: Sequence=Displayed;
                   Example: Sequence=VSP_000013, VSP_000014;

      Note         Notes concerning current isoform; optional;

                   Format: Note=free text;
                   Example: Note=Predicted;


    In the case of 'Alternative initiation' the topic 'Event' can be followed
    by a 'Comment' of free text. Format:

    CC   -!- ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS:
    CC       Event=Alternative initiation;
    CC         Comment=Optional free text with information on alternative
    CC         initiation or the products retrieved from this event. In the
    CC         case of alternative initiation there will be no other topics;

    In the case of 'Alternative splicing' the topic 'Event' can be followed by
    a 'Comment' of free text and a listing of all described isoforms. Format:

    CC   -!- ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS:
    CC       Event=Alternative splicing;
    CC         Comment=Optional free text with information on alternative
    CC         splicing or the products retrieved from this event;
    CC       Name=isoform_1; Synonyms=synonym_1[, synonym_n];
    CC         IsoId=isoform_identifier_1[, isoform_identifer_n];
    CC         Sequence=VSP_identifier_1 [, VSP_identifier_n];
    CC         Note=Optional note concerning isoform_1;
    CC       Name=isoform_n; Synonyms=synonym_1[, synonym_n];
    CC         IsoId=isoform_identifier_1[, isoform_identifer_n];
    CC         Sequence=VSP_identifier_1 [, VSP_identifier_n];
    CC         Note=Optional note concerning isoform_n;

    Example for new format of the CC lines and the corresponding FT lines for
    an entry with alternative splicing:

    ...
    CC   -!- ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS:
    CC       Event=Alternative splicing; Named isoforms=9;
    CC         Comment=Additional isoforms seem to exist. APP695, APP751 and
    CC         APP770 are the major isoforms. The L-isoforms are referred to as
    CC         appicans. Experimental confirmation may be lacking for some
    CC         isoforms;
    CC       Name=APP770; Synonyms=Prea4 770;
    CC         IsoId=P05067-1; Sequence=Displayed;
    CC       Name=APP305;
    CC         IsoId=P05067-2; Sequence=VSP_000005, VSP_000006;
    CC       Name=L-APP677;
    CC         IsoId=P05067-3; Sequence=VSP_000002, VSP_000004, VSP_000009;
    CC       Name=APP695; Synonyms=Prea4 695;
    CC         IsoId=P05067-4; Sequence=VSP_000002, VSP_000004;
    CC       Name=L-APP696;
    CC         IsoId=P05067-5; Sequence=VSP_000002, VSP_000003, VSP_000009;
    CC       Name=APP714;
    CC         IsoId=P05067-6; Sequence=VSP_000002, VSP_000003;
    CC       Name=L-APP733;
    CC         IsoId=P05067-7; Sequence=VSP_000007, VSP_000008, VSP_000009;
    CC       Name=APP751; Synonyms=Prea4 751;
    CC         IsoId=P05067-8; Sequence=VSP_000007, VSP_000008;
    CC       Name=L-APP752;
    CC         IsoId=P05067-9; Sequence=VSP_000009;
    ...
    FT   VARSPLIC    289    289       E -> V (in isoform APP695, isoform
    FT                                L-APP696, isoform L-APP677 and isoform
    FT                                APP714).
    FT                                /FTId=VSP_000002.
    FT   VARSPLIC    290    345       Missing (in isoform L-APP696 and isoform
    FT                                APP714).
    FT                                /FTId=VSP_000003.
    FT   VARSPLIC    290    364       Missing (in isoform APP695 and isoform
    FT                                L-APP677).
    FT                                /FTId=VSP_000004.
    FT   VARSPLIC    290    305       VCSEQAETGPCRAMIS -> KWYKEVHSGQARWLML (in
    FT                                isoform APP305).
    FT                                /FTId=VSP_000005.
    FT   VARSPLIC    306    770       Missing (in isoform APP305).
    FT                                /FTId=VSP_000006.
    FT   VARSPLIC    345    345       M -> I (in isoform L-APP733 and isoform
    FT                                APP751).
    FT                                /FTId=VSP_000007.
    FT   VARSPLIC    346    364       Missing (in isoform L-APP733 and isoform
    FT                                APP751).
    FT                                /FTId=VSP_000008.
    FT   VARSPLIC    637    654       Missing (in isoform L-APP677, isoform
    FT                                L-APP696, isoform L-APP733 and isoform
    FT                                L-APP752).
    FT                                /FTId=VSP_000009.
    ...


         3.4.2   PATHWAY

    We are gradually structuring the comment line topic PATHWAY. To describe
    the biochemical pathway in which the protein is involved, we use the
    following format:

    CC   -!- PATHWAY: biochemical pathway; nth step.[ Comment.]

    Example:

    CC   -!- PATHWAY: Coenzyme A (CoA) biosynthesis; first step.


         3.4.3   COFACTOR

    The comment line topic COFACTOR is gradually being modified to the
    following format:

    CC   -!- COFACTOR: cofactor1[, cofactor2 and cofactor3].[ Comment.]

    Examples:

    CC   -!- COFACTOR: Magnesium.
    CC   -!- COFACTOR: Copper, Manganese and Nickel.


         3.5   Changes concerning cross-references (DR line)

    We will add cross-references to the Gene Ontology (GO) database (available
    at http://www.geneontology.org/), which provides controlled vocabularies
    for the description of the molecular function, biological process and
    cellular component of gene products.

    The identifiers of the appropriate DR line are:

     Data bank identifier: GO
     Primary identifier:   GO's unique identifier for a GO term.
     Secondary identifier: A 1-letter abbreviation for one of the 3 ontology
                           aspects, separated from the GO term by a column. If
                           the term is longer than 45 characters, the first 43
                           characters are indicated followed by 3 dots ('...').
                           The abbreviations for the 3 distinct aspects of the
                           ontology are P (biological Process), F (molecular
                           Function) and C (cellular Component).
     Tertiary identifier:  3-character GO evidence code.
     Example:              DR   GO; GO:0003677; F:DNA binding; TAS.


         3.6   Modifications concerning the feature table (FT line)

    We are investigating a major effort in the annotation of posttranslational
    modifications, which has an effect on various feature keys and feature
    descriptions. Major format changes are described below.


         3.6.1   New feature key 'CROSSLNK'

    The feature key 'CROSSLNK' will be introduced to describe bonds between
    amino acids, which are formed posttranslationally within a peptide or
    between peptides, such as isopeptidic bonds, carbon-carbon linkages,
    carbon-nitrogen linkages and backbone condensations. It will also include
    the description of tioether bonds and thiolester bonds and thus the feature
    keys 'THIOETH' and 'THIOLEST' will be removed.

    Note: Disulfide bonds occur so often in proteins, that we will keep the
    special feature key 'DISULFID' to describe this kind of linkage.

    Format:

    FT   CROSSLNK    from     to      Description.


         3.6.2   Removal of the feature key 'THIOETH'

    See section 3.6.1.


         3.6.3   Removal of the feature key 'THIOLEST'

    See section 3.6.1.


                       4   Status of the documentation files

    Swiss-Prot is distributed with a large number of documentation files. Some
    of these files have been available for a long time (the user manual,
    release notes, the various indexes for authors, citations, keywords, etc.),
    but many have been created recently and we are continuously adding new
    files, and updating and modifying existing files. Please note that the
    header in many documentation files has changed. The following table lists
    all the documents that are currently available.

    See also section 7.3 for information on how to access updated versions of
    all documents between major releases.

     userman.txt    User manual
     relnotes.txt   Release notes for the current release (41)
     shortdes.txt   Short description of entries in Swiss-Prot

     jourlist.txt   List of cited journals
     keywlist.txt   List of keywords
     plasmid.txt    List of plasmids
     speclist.txt   List of organism (species) identification codes
     tisslist.txt   List of tissues
     experts.txt    List of on-line experts for PROSITE and Swiss-Prot
     dbxref.txt     List of databases cross-referenced in Swiss-Prot
     submit.txt     Submission of sequence data to Swiss-Prot

     acindex.txt    Accession number index
     autindex.txt   Author index
     citindex.txt   Citation index
     keyindex.txt   Keyword index
     speindex.txt   Species index
     deleteac.txt   Deleted accession number index
     7tmrlist.txt   List of 7-transmembrane G-linked receptor entries
     aatrnasy.txt   List of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
     allergen.txt   Nomenclature and index of allergen sequences
     annbioch.txt   Swiss-Prot annotation: how is biochemical information
                    assigned to sequence entries
     arath.txt      Index of Arabidopsis thaliana entries and their
                    corresponding gene designations [see 2]
     bacsu.txt      Index of Bacillus subtilis strain 168 chromosomal entries
                    and their corresponding SubtiList cross-references [see 1]
     bloodgrp.txt   Blood group antigen proteins
     bucai.txt      Index of Buchnera aphidicola (subsp. Acyrthosiphon pisum)
                    entries [see 2]
     bucap.txt      Index of Buchnera aphidicola (subsp. Schizaphis graminum)
                    entries[see 2]
     calbican.txt   Index of Candida albicans entries and their corresponding
                    gene designations
     cdlist.txt     CD nomenclature for surface proteins of human leucocytes
                    Index of Caenorhabditis elegans entries and their
     celegans.txt   corresponding gene designations and WormPep
                    cross-references
                    Index of Dictyostelium discoideum entries and their
     dicty.txt      corresponding gene designations and DictyDB
                    cross-references
     ec2dtosp.txt   Index of Escherichia coli Gene-protein database
                    (ECO2DBASE) entries referenced in Swiss-Prot
     ecoli.txt      Index of Escherichia coli strain K12 chromosomal entries
                    and their corresponding EcoGene cross-references
     embltosp.txt   Index of EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database entries
                    referenced in Swiss-Prot
     extradom.txt   Nomenclature of extracellular domains
     fly.txt        Index of Drosophila entries and their corresponding
                    FlyBase cross-references
     glycosid.txt   Classification of glycosyl hydrolase families and index of
                    glycosyl hydrolase entries in Swiss-Prot
     haein.txt      Index of Haemophilus influenzae strain Rd chromosomal
                    entries [see 1]
     helpy.txt      Index of Helicobacter pylori strain 26695 chromosomal
                    entries [see 1]
     hoxlist.txt    Vertebrate homeotic Hox proteins: nomenclature and index
     humchr01.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 1
     humchr02.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 2
     humchr03.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 3
     humchr04.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 4
     humchr05.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 5
     humchr06.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 6
     humchr07.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 7
     humchr08.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 8
     humchr09.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 9
     humchr10.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 10
     humchr11.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 11
     humchr12.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 12
     humchr13.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 13
     humchr14.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 14
     humchr15.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 15
     humchr16.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 16
     humchr17.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 17
     humchr18.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 18
     humchr19.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 19
     humchr20.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 20
     humchr21.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 21
     humchr22.txt   Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome 22
     humchrx.txt    Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome X
     humchry.txt    Index of proteins encoded on human chromosome Y
     humpvar.txt    Index of human proteins with sequence variants
     initfact.txt   List and index of translation initiation factors
     intein.txt     Index of intein-containing entries referenced in
                    Swiss-Prot
     metallo.txt    Classification of metallothioneins and index of the
                    entries in Swiss-Prot
     metja.txt      Index of Methanococcus jannaschii entries [see 1]
     mgdtosp.txt    Index of MGD entries referenced in Swiss-Prot
     mimtosp.txt    Index of MIM entries referenced in Swiss-Prot
     mycge.txt      Index of Mycoplasma genitalium strain G-37 chromosomal
                    entries [see 1]
     mycpn.txt      Index of Mycoplasma pneumoniae strain M129 chromosomal
                    entries [see 2]
     ngr234.txt     Table of predicted proteins in Rhizobium plasmid pNGR234a
     nomlist.txt    List of nomenclature related references for proteins
     pdbtosp.txt    Index of Protein Data Bank (PDB) entries referenced in
                    Swiss-Prot
     peptidas.txt   Classification of peptidase families and index of
                    peptidase entries in Swiss-Prot
     plastid.txt    List of chloroplast and cyanelle encoded proteins
     pombe.txt      Index of Schizosaccharomyces pombe entries and their
                    corresponding gene designations
     restric.txt    List of restriction enzyme and methylase entries
     ribosomp.txt   Index of ribosomal proteins classified by families on the
                    basis of sequence similarities
     ricpr.txt      Index of Rickettsia prowazekii strain Madrid E entries
                    [see 1]
     salty.txt      Index of Salmonella typhimurium strain LT2 chromosomal
                    entries and their corresponding StyGene cross-references
     syny3.txt      Index of Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803 entries [see 1]
     upflist.txt    List of UPF (Uncharacterized Protein Families) and index
                    of members
     yeast.txt      Index of Saccharomyces cerevisiae entries in Swiss-Prot
                    and their corresponding gene designations
     yeast1.txt     Yeast chromosome I entries
     yeast2.txt     Yeast chromosome II entries
     yeast3.txt     Yeast chromosome III entries
     yeast5.txt     Yeast chromosome V entries
     yeast6.txt     Yeast chromosome VI entries
     yeast7.txt     Yeast chromosome VII entries
     yeast8.txt     Yeast chromosome VIII entries
     yeast9.txt     Yeast chromosome IX entries
     yeast10.txt    Yeast chromosome X entries
     yeast11.txt    Yeast chromosome XI entries
     yeast13.txt    Yeast chromosome XIII entries
     yeast14.txt    Yeast chromosome XIV entries

    Notes:

     1)  The filenames for indexes of microbe-specific entries have been
         renamed; the filename is now composed of the 5-letter code used for
         the species in the Swiss-Prot entry name and the extension 'txt'.
         This modification concerns the following files:

         'bacsu.txt' (formerly: 'subtilis.txt'), 'haein.txt' (formerly:
         'haeinflu.txt'), 'helpy.txt' (formerly: 'hpylori.txt'), 'metja.txt'
         (formerly: 'mjannasc.txt'), 'mycge.txt' (formerly: 'mgenital.txt'),
         'ricpr.txt' (formerly: 'rprowaze.txt'), 'syny3.txt' (formerly:
         'pcc6803.txt').

     2)  The files 'arath.txt', 'bucai.txt', 'bucap.txt' and 'mycpn.txt' are
         new documents introduced since release 40.

    We have continued to include in some Swiss-Prot documentation files the
    references to Web sites relevant to the subject under consideration. There
    are now 89 documents that include such links.


          5   New features of the ExPASy World-Wide Web server related to
                                    Swiss-Prot

    Explicit general and continuously updated documentation about the ExPASy
    server is available at http://www.expasy.org/doc/expasy.pdf.

    ExPASy is constantly modified and improved. If you wish to be informed on
    the changes made to the server you can either:

       * Read the document 'History of changes, improvements and new features'
         which is available at the address: http://www.expasy.org/history.html
       * Subscribe to Swiss-Flash, a service that reports news of databases,
         software and service developments. By subscribing to this service, you
         will automatically get Swiss-Flash bulletins by electronic mail. To
         subscribe, use the address: http://www.expasy.org/swiss-flash/.

    Among all the improvements and the new features introduced since the last
    Swiss-Prot release, here are those that we believe are specifically useful
    to Swiss-Prot users:

      1. The NiceProt view of Swiss-Prot has been further improved: access to
         documentation has been facilitated by adding "mouse-over" hypertext
         links from various sections in NiceProt to the corresponding
         information in the user manual. Those hypertext links, which give
         access to documentation rather than the data related to the protein
         entry, are visually different from the ordinary hyperlinks. While they
         are not immediately recognizable as such, the user can see that they
         are clickable by moving the mouse pointer over the section headings
         such as "References" or "Keywords". A short description of the linked
         information appears at the bottom of the web browser, and when
         clicked, a small additional window is opened with related information
         extracted from the user manual.

         Similarly, in the "Cross-references" section, the names of the
         databases to which an entry is cross-referenced are linked to the
         corresponding sections in the document dbxref.txt (List of databases
         cross-referenced in Swiss-Prot).

      2. Implicit links have been added to the resources AraC-XylS, Ensembl and
         ModBase. We have removed the implicit links to DOMO, which is no
         longer maintained.

         For more details on Swiss-Prot cross-references, implicit and explicit
         links, you can read:

         Gasteiger E., Jung E., Bairoch A.
         Swiss-Prot: connecting biological knowledge via a protein database.
         Curr. Issues Mol. Biol. 3:47-55(2001)

      3. A few improvements have been applied to the pages describing the Human
         Proteomics Initiative (HPI). For each human chromosome a link is
         provided to the corresponding index of Swiss-Prot entries, to relevant
         information in the EBI Proteome database, in Ensembl, in the Human
         Genome Resources at NCBI and in euGenes at Indiana University.

         The HPI status report has been modified to include, for each of the
         counted items (e.g. splice variants, variants, references) not only
         the absolute number, but also the maximal and average number of
         occurrences per entry, and the number of entries concerned by the
         counted item.


                       6 TrEMBL - a supplement to Swiss-Prot

    The ongoing genome sequencing and mapping projects have dramatically
    increased the number of protein sequences to be incorporated into
    Swiss-Prot. Since we do not want to dilute the quality standards of
    Swiss-Prot by incorporating sequences into the database without proper
    sequence analysis and annotation, we cannot speed up the incorporation of
    new incoming data indefinitely. But as we also want to make the sequences
    available as quickly as possible, we introduced in 1995 a computer
    annotated supplement to Swiss-Prot. This supplement consists of entries in
    Swiss-Prot-like format derived from the translation of all coding sequences
    (CDS) in the EMBL nucleotide sequence database, except those already
    included in Swiss-Prot.

    This supplement is named TrEMBL (Translation from EMBL). It can be
    considered as a preliminary section of Swiss-Prot. This Swiss-Prot release
    is supplemented by TrEMBL release 21.

    TrEMBL is available by FTP from the EBI and ExPASy servers in the directory
    '/databases/trembl'. It can be queried on WWW by the EBI and ExPASy SRS
    servers. It is distributed with its own set of release notes.


                      7   FTP access to Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL

         7.1   Generalities

    Swiss-Prot is available for download on the following anonymous FTP
    servers:

     Organization Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)
                  ftp.expasy.org, au.expasy.org, bo.expasy.org,
     Address      ca.expasy.org, cn.expasy.org, kr.expasy.org,
                  tw.expasy.org, us.expasy.org
     Directory    /databases/swiss-prot/

     Organization European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
     Address      ftp.ebi.ac.uk
     Directory    /pub/databases/swissprot/


         7.2   Non-redundant database

    On the ExPASy and EBI FTP servers we distribute files that make up a
    non-redundant and complete protein sequence database consisting of three
    components:

    1) Swiss-Prot
    2) TrEMBL
    3) New entries to be integrated later into TrEMBL (hereafter known as
       TrEMBL_New)

    Every week three files are completely rebuilt. These files are named:
    sprot.dat.gz, trembl.dat.gz and trembl_new.dat.gz. As indicated by their '.
    gz' extension, these are gzip-compressed files which, when decompressed,
    produce ASCII files in Swiss-Prot format.

    Three other files are also available (sprot.fas.gz, trembl.fas.gz and
    trembl_new.fas.gz) which are compressed 'fasta' format sequence files
    useful for building the databases used by FASTA, BLAST and other sequence
    similarity search programs. Please do not use these files for any other
    purpose, as you will lose all annotations by using this stripped-down
    format.

    The files for the non-redundant database are stored in the directory
    '/databases/sp_tr_nrdb' on the ExPASy FTP server (ftp.expasy.org) and in
    the directory '/pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb' on the EBI FTP server
    (ftp.ebi.ac.uk).

    Additional notes:

       * The Swiss-Prot file continuously grows as new annotated sequences are
         added.

       * The TrEMBL file decreases in size as sequences are moved out of that
         section after being annotated and moved into Swiss-Prot. Four times a
         year a new release of TrEMBL is built at EBI, at this point the TrEMBL
         file increases in size as it then includes all of the new data (see
         next section) that has accumulated since the last release.

       * The TrEMBL_New file starts as a very small file and grows in size
         until a new release of TrEMBL is available.

       * Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL share the same system of accession numbers.
         Therefore you will not find any primary accession number duplicated
         between the two sections. A TrEMBL entry (and its associated accession
         number(s)) can either move to Swiss-Prot as a new entry or be merged
         with an existing Swiss-Prot entry. In the latter case, the accession
         number(s) of that TrEMBL entry are added to that of the Swiss-Prot
         entry.

       * TrEMBL_New does not have real accession numbers. However it was
         necessary to have an 'AC' line so as to be able to use it with
         different software products. This AC line contains a temporary
         identifier which consists of the protein_ID (protein sequence
         identifier) of the coding sequence in the parent nucleotide sequence.

       * TrEMBL_New is quite messy! You will of course find new sequence
         entries but you will also encounter sequences that are going to be
         used to update existing TrEMBL or Swiss-Prot entries. None of the
         "cleaning" steps that are applied to produce a TrEMBL release are run
         on TrEMBL_New nor are any of the computer-annotation software tools
         that are used to enhance the information content of TrEMBL. TrEMBL_New
         is provided only so that users can be sure not to miss any important
         new sequences when they run similarity searches.

       * While these three files allow you to build what we call a
         'non-redundant' database, it must be noted that this is not completely
         a true statement. Without going into a long explanation we can say
         that this is currently the best attempt in providing a complete
         selection of protein sequence entries while trying to eliminate
         redundancies. While Swiss-Prot is completely (well 99.994% !)
         non-redundant, TrEMBL is far from being non-redundant and the addition
         of Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL is even less so.

       * To describe to your users the version of the non-redundant database
         that you are providing them with, you should use a statement of the
         form:

              Swiss-Prot release 41.x of xx-yyy-2003;
              TrEMBL release 23.x of xx-yyy-2003;
              TrEMBL_New of xx-yyy-2003.


         7.3   Weekly updates of Swiss-Prot documents

    Whilst the ExPASy FTP server so far only allowed FTP access to the
    Swiss-Prot documents and indexes in their versions at the time of the last
    full release, all documents are now updated with every weekly release of
    Swiss-Prot. They are available for FTP download from the directory
    /databases/swiss-prot/updated_doc/.


         7.4   Weekly updates of Swiss-Prot

    Weekly updates of Swiss-Prot are available by anonymous FTP. Three files
    are generated at each update:

     new_seq.dat Contains all the new entries since the last full
                 release;

     upd_seq.dat Contains the entries for which the sequence data has
                 been updated since the last release;

     upd_ann.dat Contains the entries for which one or more annotation
                 fields have been updated since the last release.

    Important notes

       * Although we try to follow a regular schedule, we do not promise to
         update these files every week. In most cases two weeks may elapse
         between two updates.
       * Instead of using the above files, you can, every week, download an
         updated copy of the Swiss-Prot database. This file is available in the
         directory containing the non-redundant database (see section 7.2).


                              8   ENZYME and PROSITE

         8.1   The ENZYME nomenclature database

    Release 30.0 of the ENZYME nomenclature database is distributed with
    release 41 of Swiss-Prot. ENZYME release 30.0 contains information relative
    to 4'136 enzymes. In this release, we have added a significant number of
    new entries and we also updated many entries.


         8.2   The PROSITE database

    PROSITE now comes with its own release notes.


                              9   We need your help!

    We welcome feedback from our users. We would especially appreciate your
    notifying us if you find that sequences belonging to your field of
    expertise are missing from the database. We also would like to be notified
    about annotations to be updated, if, for example, the function of a protein
    has been clarified or if new information about post-translational
    modifications has become available. To facilitate this feedback we offer,
    on the ExPASy WWW server, a form that allows the submission of updates
    and/or corrections to Swiss-Prot:

         http://www.expasy.org/sprot/update.html

    It is also possible, from any entry in Swiss-Prot displayed by the ExPASy
    server, to submit updates and/or corrections for that particular entry.
    Finally, you can also send your comments by electronic mail to the address:

         swiss-prot@expasy.org

    Note that all update requests are assigned a unique identifier of the form
    UR-Xnnnn (example: UR-A0123). This identifier is used internally by the
    Swiss-Prot staff at SIB and EBI to track requests and is also used in
    e-mail exchanges with the persons who have submitted a request.


                           APPENDIX A:   Some statistics

         A.1   Amino acid composition

         A.1.1   Composition in percent for the complete database

       Ala (A) 7.72   Gln (Q) 3.92   Leu (L) 9.56   Ser (S) 6.98
       Arg (R) 5.24   Glu (E) 6.54   Lys (K) 5.96   Thr (T) 5.51
       Asn (N) 4.28   Gly (G) 6.90   Met (M) 2.36   Trp (W) 1.18
       Asp (D) 5.27   His (H) 2.26   Phe (F) 4.06   Tyr (Y) 3.13
       Cys (C) 1.60   Ile (I) 5.88   Pro (P) 4.88   Val (V) 6.66

       Asx (B) 0.000  Glx (Z) 0.000  Xaa (X) 0.01


         A.1.2   Classification of the amino acids by their frequency

       Leu, Ala, Ser, Gly, Val, Glu, Lys, Ile, Thr, Asp, Arg, Pro, Asn, Phe,
       Gln, Tyr, Met, His, Cys, Trp


         A.2   Taxonomic origin

    Total number of species represented in this release of Swiss-Prot: 7'778
    The first twenty species represent 51'656 sequences: 42.1% of the total
    number of entries.


         A.2.1   Table of the frequency of occurrence of species

            Species represented 1x: 3679
                                2x: 1206
                                3x:  619
                                4x:  403
                                5x:  273
                                6x:  251
                                7x:  192
                                8x:  146
                                9x:  120
                               10x:   66
                           11- 20x:  331
                           21- 50x:  250
                           51-100x:   84
                             >100x:  158


         A.2.2   Table of the most represented species

      ------  ---------  --------------------------------------------
      Number  Frequency  Species
      ------  ---------  --------------------------------------------
           1       9172  Homo sapiens (Human)
           2       6169  Mus musculus (Mouse)
           3       4892  Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Baker's yeast)
           4       4832  Escherichia coli
           5       3442  Rattus norvegicus (Rat)
           6       2402  Bacillus subtilis
           7       2291  Caenorhabditis elegans
           8       2116  Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Fission yeast)
           9       1952  Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse-ear cress)
          10       1773  Haemophilus influenzae
          11       1764  Drosophila melanogaster (Fruit fly)
          12       1529  Methanococcus jannaschii
          13       1485  Escherichia coli O157:H7
          14       1389  Bos taurus (Bovine)
          15       1371  Mycobacterium tuberculosis
          16       1240  Salmonella typhimurium
          17       1062  Gallus gallus (Chicken)
          18        942  Shigella flexneri
          19        919  Synechocystis sp. (strain PCC 6803)
          20        914  Escherichia coli O6
          21        876  Archaeoglobus fulgidus
          22        839  Pseudomonas aeruginosa
          23        838  Xenopus laevis (African clawed frog)
          24        822  Sus scrofa (Pig)
          25        771  Salmonella typhi
          26        716  Aquifex aeolicus
          27        704  Oryctolagus cuniculus (Rabbit)
          28        687  Mycoplasma pneumoniae
          29        670  Rhizobium meliloti (Sinorhizobium meliloti)
          30        609  Vibrio cholerae
          31        599  Treponema pallidum
          32        581  Mycobacterium leprae
          33        572  Buchnera aphidicola (subsp. Acyrthosiphon pisum)
          34        560  Buchnera aphidicola (subsp. Schizaphis graminum)
          35        536  Helicobacter pylori (Campylobacter pylori)
          36        535  Rickettsia prowazekii
          37        524  Yersinia pestis
          38        519  Helicobacter pylori J99 (Campylobacter pylori J99)
          39        519  Streptomyces coelicolor
          40        494  Bacillus halodurans
          41        491  Zea mays (Maize)
          42        491  Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum
          43        486  Mycoplasma genitalium
          44        480  Pasteurella multocida
          45        454  Anabaena sp. (strain PCC 7120)
          46        432  Lactococcus lactis (subsp. lactis) (Streptococcus lactis)
          47        419  Thermotoga maritima
          48        416  Oryza sativa (Rice)
          49        405  Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease spirochete)
          50        404  Chlamydia trachomatis
          51        403  Rhizobium sp. (strain NGR234)
          52        393  Canis familiaris (Dog)
          53        391  Chlamydia pneumoniae (Chlamydophila pneumoniae)
          54        390  Neisseria meningitidis (serogroup B)
          55        386  Neisseria meningitidis (serogroup A)
          56        381  Chlamydia muridarum
          57        366  Caulobacter crescentus
          58        365  Pyrococcus horikoshii
          59        359  Listeria monocytogenes
          60        359  Clostridium acetobutylicum
          61        357  Pyrococcus abyssi
          62        354  Ralstonia solanacearum (Pseudomonas solanacearum)
          63        352  Listeria innocua
          64        352  Rhizobium loti (Mesorhizobium loti)
          65        350  Streptococcus pneumoniae
          66        346  Agrobacterium tumefaciens (strain C58 / ATCC 33970)
          67        341  Nicotiana tabacum (Common tobacco)
          68        337  Xylella fastidiosa
          69        335  Deinococcus radiodurans
          70        332  Ovis aries (Sheep)
          71        326  Xanthomonas campestris (pv. campestris)
          72        325  Halobacterium sp. (strain NRC-1)
          73        320  Staphylococcus aureus (strain N315)
          74        320  Campylobacter jejuni
          75        317  Staphylococcus aureus (strain Mu50 / ATCC 700699)
          76        316  Dictyostelium discoideum (Slime mold)
          77        311  Clostridium perfringens
          78        299  Sulfolobus solfataricus
          79        297  Staphylococcus aureus (strain MW2)
          80        290  Corynebacterium glutamicum (Brevibacterium flavum)
          81        288  Pisum sativum (Garden pea)
          82        287  Xanthomonas axonopodis (pv. citri)
          83        285  Streptococcus pyogenes
          84        283  Aeropyrum pernix
          85        278  Pyrococcus furiosus
          86        278  Staphylococcus aureus
          87        269  Brucella melitensis
          88        268  Bacteriophage T4
          89        266  Neurospora crassa
          90        265  Triticum aestivum (Wheat)
          91        264  Candida albicans (Yeast)
          92        261  Rickettsia conorii
          93        258  Hordeum vulgare (Barley)
          94        254  Vaccinia virus (strain Copenhagen)
          95        251  Glycine max (Soybean)
          96        250  Lycopersicon esculentum (Tomato)
          97        248  Rhodobacter capsulatus (Rhodopseudomonas capsulata)
          98        247  Thermoanaerobacter tengcongensis
          99        246  Solanum tuberosum (Potato)
         100        244  Pseudomonas putida


         A.2.3   Taxonomic distribution of the sequences

       Kingdom       Sequences (% of the database)
        Archaea            7119 (  6%)
        Bacteria          46344 ( 38%)
        Eukaryota         60623 ( 49%)
        Viruses            8478 (  7%)

       Within Eukaryota:

        Category            sequences (% of Eukaryota) (% of the complete database)
         Human                   9172 ( 15%)           (  7%)
         Other Mammalia         16041 ( 26%)           ( 13%)
         Other Vertebrata        5806 ( 10%)           (  5%)
         Viridiplantae           9581 ( 16%)           (  8%)
         Fungi                   9337 ( 15%)           (  8%)
         Insecta                 3352 (  6%)           (  3%)
         Nematoda                2504 (  4%)           (  2%)
         Other                   4830 (  8%)           (  4%)


         A.3   Sequence size

         A.3.1   Repartition of the sequences by size (excluding fragments)

                   From   To  Number             From   To   Number
                      1-  50    2283             1001-1100     1127
                     51- 100    8420             1101-1200      796
                    101- 150   12542             1201-1300      550
                    151- 200   11267             1301-1400      379
                    201- 250   11387             1401-1500      305
                    251- 300   10019             1501-1600      213
                    301- 350   10039             1601-1700      166
                    351- 400    9804             1701-1800      118
                    401- 450    7435             1801-1900      128
                    451- 500    6547             1901-2000      106
                    501- 550    5067             2001-2100       59
                    551- 600    3400             2101-2200       96
                    601- 650    2753             2201-2300       99
                    651- 700    2015             2301-2400       57
                    701- 750    1766             2401-2500       56
                    751- 800    1474             >2500          326
                    801- 850    1101
                    851- 900    1142
                    901- 950     817
                    951-1000     704


         A.3.2   Longest and shortest sequences

       The shortest sequence is  GRWM_HUMAN (P24272) :     3 amino acids.
       The longest sequence is   NEBU_HUMAN (P20929) :  6669 amino acids.


         A.4   Journal citations

    Note: the following citation statistics reflect the number of distinct
    journal citations.

    Total number of journals cited in this release of Swiss-Prot: 1'316


         A.4.1   Table of the frequency of journal citations

            Journals cited 1x:  496
                           2x:  167
                           3x:   84
                           4x:   61
                           5x:   46
                           6x:   47
                           7x:   26
                           8x:   25
                           9x:   22
                          10x:   11
                      11- 20x:   98
                      21- 50x:   98
                      51-100x:   39
                        >100x:   96


         A.4.2   List of the most cited journals in Swiss-Prot

       Nb    Citations   Journal name
       --    ---------   -------------------------------------------------------------
        1         9138   Journal of Biological Chemistry
        2         5013   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A.
        3         3631   Nucleic Acids Research
        4         3612   Journal of Bacteriology
        5         3381   Gene
        6         2663   FEBS Letters
        7         2598   Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications
        8         2429   European Journal of Biochemistry
        9         2383   Biochemistry
       10         2171   The EMBO Journal
       11         2045   Nature
       12         2024   Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
       13         1821   Journal of Molecular Biology
       14         1752   Genomics
       15         1579   Cell
       16         1542   Molecular and Cellular Biology
       17         1243   Biochemical Journal
       18         1146   Science
       19         1123   Plant Molecular Biology
       20         1117   Molecular and General Genetics
       21         1068   Molecular Microbiology
       22          855   Journal of Biochemistry
       23          830   Virology
       24          748   Human Molecular Genetics
       25          693   Journal of Cell Biology
       26          645   Nature Genetics
       27          597   Journal of Virology
       28          588   Plant Physiology
       29          582   Human Mutation
       30          579   Genes and Development
       31          550   Oncogene
       32          538   The American Journal of Human Genetics
       33          530   Infection and Immunity
       34          529   Yeast
       35          516   Journal of Immunology
       36          494   Journal of General Virology
       37          469   Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics
       38          454   Structure
       39          446   FEMS Microbiology Letters
       40          433   Microbiology
       41          394   Development
       42          379   Human Genetics
       43          376   Current Genetics
       44          376   Nature Structural Biology
       45          347   Genetics
       46          343   Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology
       47          335   Blood
       48          317   Applied and Environmental Microbiology
       49          313   Journal of Clinical Investigation
       50          299   Molecular Endocrinology
       51          283   DNA and Cell Biology
       52          282   Protein Science
       53          281   Journal of Molecular Evolution
       54          276   Developmental Biology
       55          276   Mammalian Genome
       56          271   Biological Chemistry Hoppe-Seyler
       57          251   Cancer Research
       58          248   Journal of Experimental Medicine
       59          246   Neuron
       60          241   Immunogenetics
       61          240   Mechanisms of Development
       62          229   Journal of General Microbiology
       63          228   Endocrinology
       64          221   DNA Sequence
       65          217   Acta Crystallographica, Section D
       66          213   Hoppe-Seyler's Zeitschrift fur Physiologische Chemie
       67          209   Molecular Biology of the Cell
       68          207   The Plant Cell
       69          203   Journal of Cell Science
       70          191   Molecular Biology and Evolution
       71          190   Brain Research. Molecular Brain Research
       72          187   The Plant Journal
       73          183   Journal of Neurochemistry
       74          180   Journal of Neuroscience
       75          160   Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology
       76          158   Cytogenetics and Cell Genetics
       77          156   DNA
       78          154   Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry
       79          152   The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism
       80          145   Toxicon
       81          144   Molecular Pharmacology
       82          143   Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy
       83          140   American Journal of Physiology
       84          131   Biochimie
       85          127   Bioorganicheskaia Khimiia
       86          125   Virus Research
       87          125   Proteins
       88          122   DNA Research
       89          121   Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions
       90          119   Hemoglobin
       91          116   Peptides
       92          114   Agricultural and Biological Chemistry
       93          112   Current Biology
       94          111   Journal of Investigative Dermatology
       95          110   Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology
       96          106   Genome Research

         A.5   Statistics for some line types

    The following table summarizes the total number of some Swiss-Prot lines,
    as well as the number of entries with at least one such line, and the
    frequency of the lines.

                                       Total    Number of  Average
    Line type / subtype                number   entries    per entry
    ---------------------------------  -------- ---------  ---------

    References (RL)                     232571              1.90
       Journal                          195556    111991    1.60
       Submitted to EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ    34500     27873    0.28
       Unpublished observations            536       532   <0.01
       Submitted to Swiss-Prot             464       462   <0.01
       Plant Gene Register                 463       453   <0.01
       Book citation                       460       450   <0.01
       Thesis                              190       188   <0.01
       Submitted to other databases        190       189   <0.01
       Unpublished results                 123       121   <0.01
       Patent                               87        86   <0.01
       Worm Breeder's Gazette                2         2   <0.01

    Comments (CC)                       405433              3.31
       SIMILARITY                       117866    103489    0.96
       FUNCTION                          77092     75796    0.63
       SUBCELLULAR LOCATION              55038     55038    0.45
       CATALYTIC ACTIVITY                39528     37138    0.32
       SUBUNIT                           33846     33846    0.28
       PATHWAY                           17449     16966    0.14
       TISSUE SPECIFICITY                13626     13626    0.11
       COFACTOR                          12141     12141    0.10
       MISCELLANEOUS                      7816      7190    0.06
       PTM                                7140      6571    0.06
       ALTERNATIVE PRODUCTS               3946      3946    0.03
       INDUCTION                          3558      3558    0.03
       DOMAIN                             3535      3241    0.03
       DEVELOPMENTAL STAGE                3362      3362    0.03
       CAUTION                            3342      3172    0.03
       DISEASE                            2244      1868    0.02
       ENZYME REGULATION                  1753      1753    0.01
       MASS SPECTROMETRY                   893       810    0.01
       DATABASE                            818       751    0.01
       POLYMORPHISM                        343       334   <0.01
       BIOTECHNOLOGY                        50        50   <0.01
       PHARMACEUTICAL                       47        47   <0.01

    Features (FT)                       655938              5.35
       DOMAIN                            95401     28727    0.78
       TRANSMEM                          77067     16988    0.63
       CONFLICT                          47337     16661    0.39
       CARBOHYD                          45507     11138    0.37
       DISULFID                          41846     10872    0.34
       TURN                              39177      2956    0.32
       METAL                             36827     10004    0.30
       STRAND                            36304      2644    0.30
       HELIX                             27742      2845    0.23
       ACT_SITE                          24322     15216    0.20
       CHAIN                             23456     19176    0.19
       VARIANT                           23307      4423    0.19
       REPEAT                            22336      3704    0.18
       NP_BIND                           15500     10893    0.13
       SIGNAL                            14828     14826    0.12
       MOD_RES                           13336      7528    0.11
       NON_TER                           10321      7875    0.08
       BINDING                            8145      6285    0.07
       ZN_FING                            7821      2770    0.06
       VARSPLIC                           6951      3249    0.06
       SITE                               6265      4319    0.05
       INIT_MET                           5574      5545    0.05
       PROPEP                             4686      4026    0.04
       MUTAGEN                            4273      1337    0.03
       DNA_BIND                           4193      3949    0.03
       CA_BIND                            4049      1149    0.03
       LIPID                              2946      2395    0.02
       TRANSIT                            2582      2562    0.02
       PEPTIDE                            2517      1001    0.02
       NON_CONS                            804       411    0.01
       UNSURE                              290       123   <0.01
       SE_CYS                              111        73   <0.01
       THIOETH                              94        32   <0.01
       THIOLEST                             23        23   <0.01

    Cross-references (DR)               999237              8.15
       EMBL                             230657    116257    1.88
       InterPro                         195677    104236    1.60
       Pfam                             133012     99557    1.09
       PROSITE                          105218     66696    0.86
       PIR                               47040     35736    0.38
       PRINTS                            39413     34822    0.32
       SMART                             38729     29473    0.32
       HSSP                              38069     38069    0.31
       TIGRFAMs                          31394     29063    0.26
       ProDom                            30120     28820    0.25
       HAMAP                             23868     23778    0.19
       PDB                               11737      3547    0.10
       TIGR                              11065     11020    0.09
       MIM                                8171      7086    0.07
       Genew                              7836      7788    0.06
       MGD                                5820      5805    0.05
       SGD                                4936      4882    0.04
       EcoGene                            4228      4226    0.03
       MEROPS                             3316      3222    0.03
       TRANSFAC                           2464      2214    0.02
       WormPep                            2413      2239    0.02
       SubtiList                          2362      2361    0.02
       FlyBase                            2236      2173    0.02
       GeneDB_SPombe                      2131      2101    0.02
       TubercuList                        1400      1363    0.01
       StyGene                            1196      1193    0.01
       SWISS-2DPAGE                        810       809    0.01
       ListiList                           712       658    0.01
       Leproma                             585       581   <0.01
       Gramene                             411       411   <0.01
       MaizeDB                             405       401   <0.01
       HIV                                 370       354   <0.01
       REBASE                              358       353   <0.01
       ECO2DBASE                           351       299   <0.01
       DictyDb                             319       316   <0.01
       GlycoSuiteDB                        259       259   <0.01
       ZFIN                                225       225   <0.01
       PHCI-2DPAGE                         211       211   <0.01
       MypuList                            131       131   <0.01
       Aarhus/Ghent-2DPAGE                 128        98   <0.01
       Siena-2DPAGE                        104       104   <0.01
       HSC-2DPAGE                           85        85   <0.01
       PhosSite                             53        53   <0.01
       COMPLUYEAST-2DPAGE                   50        50   <0.01
       PMMA-2DPAGE                          47        47   <0.01
       Maize-2DPAGE                         39        39   <0.01
       SagaList                             25        25   <0.01
       ANU-2DPAGE                           15        15   <0.01


         A.6   Miscellaneous statistics

    Total number of distinct authors cited in Swiss-Prot: 164'410

    Total number of chloroplast-encoded sequences: 3'131
    Total number of mitochondrial-encoded sequences: 2'385
    Total number of cyanelle-encoded sequences: 145
    Total number of plasmid-encoded sequences: 2'624

    Number of additional sequences encoded in splice variants : 5'661

    --End of document--
