---
title: TrEMBL release 23.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 2003-03-01
categories: tr-major
---

                                  TrEMBL Release Notes
                                  Release 23, March 2003

        EMBL Outstation
        European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
        Wellcome Trust Genome Campus
        Hinxton
        Cambridge CB10 1SD
        United Kingdom

        Telephone: (+44 1223) 494 444
        Fax: (+44 1223) 494 468
        Electronic mail address: datalib@ebi.ac.uk
        WWW server: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/

        Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)
        Centre Medical Universitaire
        1, rue Michel Servet
        1211 Geneva 4
        Switzerland

        Telephone: (+41 22) 702 50 50
        Fax: (+41 22) 702 58 58
        Electronic mail address: Amos.Bairoch@isb-sib.ch
        WWW server: http://www.expasy.org/


        Acknowledgements

        TrEMBL has been prepared by:

        o  Maria Jesus Martin, Claire O'Donovan, Nicola Althorpe, Rolf
           Apweiler, Daniel Barrell, Kirsty Bates, Paul Browne, Daniel Barrell,
           Kirill Degtyarenko, Gill Fraser, Alexander Fedetov, Andre Hackmann,
           Alexander Kanapin, Youla Karavidopoulou, Paul Kersey, Ernst
           Kretschmann, Kati Laiho, Minna Lehvaslaiho, Michele Magrane, Michelle
           McHale, Virginie Mittard, Nicola Mulder, John F. O'Rourke, Sandra
           Orchard, Astrid Rakow, Sandra van den Broek, Eleanor Whitfield and
           Allyson Williams at the EMBL Outstation - European Bioinformatics
           Institute (EBI) in Hinxton, UK;
        o  Amos Bairoch, Alexandre Gattiker, Karine Michoud, Isabelle Phan and
           Sandrine Pilbout at the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics in Geneva,
           Switzerland.

        Copyright Notice
        TrEMBL copyright (c) 2003 EMBL-EBI
        This manual and the database it accompanies may be copied and
        redistributed freely, without advance permission, provided
        that this copyright statement is reproduced with each copy.

        Citation

        If you  want to  cite  TrEMBL  in  a  publication  please  use
        the following reference:

        Boeckmann B., Bairoch A., Apweiler R., Blatter M., Estreicher A.,
        Gasteiger E., Martin M.J., Michoud K., O'Donovan C., Phan I.,
        Pilbout S., and Schneider M. (2003)
        The Swiss-Prot protein knowledgebase and its supplement TrEMBL in
        2003.
        Nucleic Acids Res. 31:365-370.


                             1. Introduction


    TrEMBL is a computer-annotated protein sequence database
    complementing the Swiss-Prot Protein Knowledgebase. TrEMBL contains
    the translations of all coding sequences (CDS) present in the
    EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ Nucleotide Sequence Databases and also protein
    sequences extracted from the literature or submitted to Swiss-Prot,
    which are not yet integrated into Swiss-Prot. For all TrEMBL entries
    which should finally be upgraded to the standard Swiss-Prot quality,
    Swiss-Prot accession numbers have been assigned.

                            2. Why a complement to Swiss-Prot?

    The ongoing gene sequencing and mapping projects have dramatically
    increased the number of protein sequences to be incorporated into
    Swiss-Prot. We do not want to dilute the quality standards of Swiss-Prot
    by incorporating sequences without proper sequence analysis and
    annotation, but we do want to make the sequences available as quickly as
    possible. TrEMBL achieves this second goal, and is a major step in the
    process of speeding up subsequent upgrading of annotation to the standard
    Swiss-Prot quality.To address the problem of redundancy, the translations
    of all coding sequences (CDS) in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database
    already included in Swiss-Prot have been removed from TrEMBL.


                            3. The Release

    This TrEMBL release has been produced in synch with Swiss-Prot release 41. It
    was created from the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database release 73 and contains
    921'952 entries and 40'914'860 amino acids.

    TrEMBL is split in two main sections: SP-TrEMBL and REM-TrEMBL:
    SP-TrEMBL (Swiss-Prot TrEMBL) contains the entries (830'525) which should
    be eventually incorporated into Swiss-Prot. Swiss-Prot accession numbers
    have been assigned for all SP-TrEMBL entries.

    SP-TrEMBL is organized in subsections:

    arc.dat (Archaea):                          1736 entries
    arp.dat (Complete Archaeal proteomes):     31625 entries
    fun.dat (Fungi):                           15977 entries
    hum.dat (Human):                           34880 entries
    inv.dat (Invertebrates):                   79680 entries
    mam.dat (Other Mammals):                   12223 entries
    mhc.dat (MHC proteins):                     8813 entries
    org.dat (Organelles):                      73538 entries
    phg.dat (Bacteriophages):                   6448 entries
    pln.dat (Plants):                          80929 entries
    pro.dat (Prokaryotes):                     79736 entries
    prp.dat (Complete Prokaryotic Proteomes): 181432 entries
    rod.dat (Rodents):                         40143 entries
    unc.dat (Unclassified):                      331 entries
    vrl.dat (Viruses):                         82490 entries
    vrt.dat (Other Vertebrates):               14889 entries
    vrv.dat (Retroviruses):                    85655 entries

    107'123 new entries have been integrated in SP-TrEMBL. The sequences of
    1713 SP-TrEMBL entries have been updated and the annotation has been
    updated in 252'549 entries.

    In the document deleteac.txt, you will find a list of all accession numbers
    which were previously present in TrEMBL, but which have now been deleted from
    the database.

    REM-TrEMBL (REMaining TrEMBL) contains the entries (91'427) that we do
    not want to include in Swiss-Prot. REM-TrEMBL entries do not have Swiss-Prot
    accession numbers. Instead the stable ID portion of the protein_id present
    in the source EMBL/DDBJ/GenBank nucleotide sequence database entries is
    used as the ID and accession number.This section is organized in six
    subsections:

       1) Immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors (Immuno.dat)
          Most REM-TrEMBL entries are  immunoglobulins and  T-cell receptors. We
          stopped entering immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors into Swiss-Prot,
          because we only want to keep  the  germ line gene derived translations
          of these proteins in Swiss-Prot and not all known somatic recombinated
          variations of  these proteins.  We would like to  create a specialized
          database  dealing  with  these  sequences  as a further  supplement to
          Swiss-Prot  and  keep  only a  representative  cross-section of  these
          proteins in Swiss-Prot.

       2) Synthetic sequences (Synth.dat)
          Another category of data, which will not be included in Swiss-Prot are
          synthetic sequences.  Again, we do not want to  leave these entries in
          TrEMBL. Ideally one should build a specialized database for artificial
          sequences as a further supplement to Swiss-Prot.

       3) Patent application sequences (Patent.dat)
          A third  subsection consists of  coding sequences captured from patent
          applications.  A thorough  survey of  these  entries  have shown  that
          apart from a rather small minority  (which in  most cases have already
          been integrated in Swiss-Prot), most of these sequences contain either
          erroneous data or concern artificially generated sequences outside the
          scope of Swiss-Prot.

       4) Small fragments (Smalls.dat)
          Another  subsection  consists of fragments  with less than eight amino
          acids.

       5) CDS not coding for real proteins (Pseudo.dat)
          This subsection consists of CDS translations where we have strong
          evidence to believe that these CDS are not coding for real proteins.

       6) Truncated proteins (Truncated.dat)
          The last subsection consists of truncated proteins which result from
          events like mutations introducing a stop codon leading to the truncation
          of the protein product.

                    4. Format Differences Between Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL

    The format and conventions used by TrEMBL follow as closely as possible
    that of Swiss-Prot. Hence, it is not necessary to produce an additional
    user manual and extensive release notes for TrEMBL. The information given
    in the Swiss-Prot release notes and user manual are in general valid for
    TrEMBL. The differences are mentioned below.

    The general structure of an entry is identical in Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL.
    The data class used in TrEMBL (in the ID line) is always 'PRELIMINARY',
    whereas in Swiss-Prot it is always 'STANDARD'.

    Differences in line types present in Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL:

    The ID line (IDentification):

    The entry name used in SP-TrEMBL is the same as the Accession Number of the
    entry. The entry name used in REM-TrEMBL is the stable part of the protein_id
    tagged to the corresponding CDS in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database.
    'protein_id' stands for the "Protein Identification" number. It is a number
    that you will find in the feature table of the EMBL nucleotide sequence
    entries in a qualifier called "/protein_id" which is tagged to every CDS.

    Example:

    FT   CDS             339..1514
    FT                   /codon_start=1
    FT                   /db_xref="PID:g1256015"
    FT                   /product="dystrobrevin-epsilon"
    FT                   /protein_id="AAC50431.1"

    The protein_id is defined as follows in the The DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank Feature Table
    Definition documentation
    Qualifier          /protein_id
    Definition         Protein Identifier, issued by International collaborators.
                       This qualifier consists of a stable ID portion (3+5 format
                       with 3 position letters and 5 numbers) plus a version
                       number after the decimal point.

    Value format
    Example            /protein_id="AAA12345.1"
    Comment            When the protein sequence encoded by the CDS changes, only
                       the version number of the /protein_id value is incremented.
                       The stable part of the /protein_id remains unchanged and
                       as a result will permanently be associated with a given
                       protein. This qualifier is valid only on CDS features
                       which translate into a valid protein.



    The DT line (DaTe)

    The format of the DT lines that serve to indicate when an entry was
    created and updated are identical to that defined in Swiss-Prot; but the
    DT lines in TrEMBL refer to the TrEMBL release. The difference is
    shown in the example below.

        DT lines in a Swiss-Prot entry:

        DT   01-JAN-1988 (Rel. 06, Created)
        DT   01-JUL-1989 (Rel. 11, Last sequence update)
        DT   01-AUG-1992 (Rel. 23, Last annotation update)

        DT lines in a TrEMBL entry:

        DT   01-NOV-1996 (TrEMBLrel. 01, Created)
        DT   01-NOV-1999 (TrEMBLrel. 12, Last sequence update)
        DT   28-FEB-2003 (TrEMBLrel. 23, Last annotation update)

                    5. Weekly updates of TrEMBL and non-redundant data sets

    5.1 TrEMBL updates

    Weekly cumulative updates of TrEMBL are available by anonymous FTP and
    from the EBI SRS server.

    5.2 SPTr

    We also produce every week a complete non-redundant protein sequence
    collection by providing three compressed files (these are in the directory
    /pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb on the EBI FTP server and in databases/sp_tr_nrdb
    on the ExPASy server): sprot.dat.gz, trembl.dat.gz and trembl_new.dat.gz.
    This set of non-redundant files is especially important for two types of
    users:
    (i) Managers of similarity search services. They can now provide what is
    currently the most comprehensive and non-redundant data set of protein
    sequences.
    (ii) Anybody wanting to update their full copy of Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL to
    their own schedule without having to wait for full releases of Swiss-Prot
    or TrEMBL.

    5.3 XML

    A version of Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL in XML format has been developed and is
    provided with this release. More information is available at
    http://www.ebi.ac.uk/swissprot/SP-ML <http://www.ebi.ac.uk/swissprot/SP-ML/> and the data can be downloaded
    from ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl/xml <ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl/xml/> and
    ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb/xml <ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb/xml/>

    We would welcome any feedback from the user community.

    5.4 Varsplic Expand

    We also provide Varsplic Expand which is a program to generate
    "expanded" sequences from Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL records i.e. sequences
    including the variants specified by the varsplic, variant and conflict
    annotations. New records are produced in either pseudo-Swiss-Prot or
    FASTA format for each specified variant. More information and the data is
    available at ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/sp_tr_nrdb/

                6. Access/Data Distribution

    FTP server:     ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl <ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl/>
    SRS server:     http://srs.ebi.ac.uk/

    TrEMBL is also available on the Swiss-Prot CD-ROM.
    Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL is searchable on the following servers at the EBI:

    FASTA3  (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/fasta33/)
    BLAST2  (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/blast2/)
    Scanps  (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/scanps/)
    MPSrch  (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/MPsrch/)

    For each TrEMBL release, a synchronized version of the concurrent Swiss-Prot
    release is distributed at ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl/swissprot/

        7. Description of changes made to TrEMBL since release 22.

    7.1 Changes concerning cross-references (DR line)

      We have added cross-references from TrEMBL to a number of new databases.

      7.1.1 Schizosaccharomyces pombe GeneDB Prototype

      We have added cross-references to the Schizosaccharomyces pombe GeneDB
      Prototype (available at http://www.genedb.org/genedb/pombe/index.jsp)

      7.1.2 Genew

      We have added cross-references to the Human Gene Nomenclature Database Genew
      (available at http://www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/nomenclature/searchgenes.pl).


    7.2 Changes concerning the Organelle (OG) line

    The term Nucleomorph has been added which is the residual nucleus of an
    algal endosymbiont that resides inside its host cell.


                          8. Planned changes

    8.1 Evidence tags

    We are continuing with the introduction of evidence tags to Swiss-Prot and
    TrEMBL entries. The aim of this is to allow users to see where data items
    came from and to enable Swiss-Prot staff to automatically update data if
    the underlying evidence changes. This is ongoing internally and the evidence
    tags are visible in the XML version of Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL.
    For more information, please see
    http://www.ebi.ac.uk/swissprot/SP-ML/evidence.html
    We would welcome any feedback from the user community.

    8.2 Conversion of TrEMBL to mixed case

    Most of the DE (DEscription), GN (Gene Name), RC (Reference Comment)
    and CC (Comment) lines have been converted to mixed case internally. The
    conversion is ongoing and will be made public as the conversion of each
    line type reaches a satisfactory stage. A mixed case version of the DE
    line was made public in release 21. The RC line is mixed case in this
    release.

    8.3 Version of SPTr in XML format:

    We intend to provide an XML version of SPTr updated monthly

    8.4 Reference Comment (RC) line topics may span lines

    The RC (Reference Comment) line store comments relevant to the reference
    cited, in currently 5 distinct topics: PLASMID, SPECIES, STRAIN, TISSUE and
    TRANSPOSON. It is not always possible to list all information within one
    line. Therefore we will allow multiple RC lines, in which one topic might
    span over a line. Example:

    RC   STRAIN=Various strains;

    could become

    RC   STRAIN=AZ.026, DC.005, GA.039, GA2181, IL.014, IN.018, KY.172, KY2.37,
    RC   LA.013, MN.001, MNb027, MS.040, NY.016, OH.036, TN.173, TN2.38,
    RC   UT.002, AL.012, AZ.180, MI.035, VA.015, and IL2.17;

    8.5  New format of comment line (CC) topics

    We are continuing a major overhaul of various comment line topics. We would
    like the majority of the information stored to be usable by computer
    programs (while remaining human-readable). We are therefore standardizing
    the format of the topics. Please see Swiss-Prot release 41 relnotes for
    further details.

    8.6 Modifications concerning the feature table (FT line)

    We are investigating a major effort in the annotation of posttranslational
    modifications, which has an effect on various feature keys and feature
    descriptions. Please see Swiss-Prot release 41 relnotes for further details.

    8.7  Extension of the entry name format

    Currently TrEMBL has it's accession number as the entry name. It is
    intended to extend this to have the accession number as the protein
    name component of the entry name (having elongated the mnemonic code
    from 4 characters to 6) and to assign the mnemonic species identification
    code of at most 5 alphanumeric characters as Swiss-Prot currently does.
