---
title: TrEMBL release 26.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 2004-03-02
categories: tr-major
---

                                  TrEMBL Release Notes
                                  Release 26, March 2004


    EMBL Outstation
    European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
    Wellcome Trust Genome Campus
    Hinxton
    Cambridge CB10 1SD
    United Kingdom

    Telephone: (+44 1223) 494 444
    Fax: (+44 1223) 494 468
    Electronic mail address: datalib@ebi.ac.uk/swissprot@ebi.ac.uk
    WWW server: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/

    Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)
    Centre Medical Universitaire
    1, rue Michel Servet
    1211 Geneva 4
    Switzerland

    Telephone: (+41 22) 702 50 50
    Fax: (+41 22) 702 58 58
    Electronic mail address: Amos.Bairoch@isb-sib.ch
    WWW server: http://www.expasy.org/


    Acknowledgements

    UniProtKB/TrEMBL has been prepared by:

    o Maria Jesus Martin, Claire O'Donovan, Nicola Althorpe, Rolf
    Apweiler, Daniel Barrell, Kirsty Bates, Paul Browne, Kirill
    Degtyarenko, Ruth Eberhardt, Gill Fraser, Alexander Fedetov, Andre
    Hackmann, Alexander Kanapin, Youla Karavidopoulou, Paul Kersey, Ernst
    Kretschmann, Kati Laiho, Minna Lehvaslaiho, Michele Magrane, Michelle
    McHale, Virginie Mittard, Nicola Mulder, John F. O'Rourke, Markiyan
    Oliynyk, Sandra Orchard, Astrid Rakow, Sandra van den Broek, Eleanor
    Whitfield and Allyson Williams at the EMBL Outstation - European
    Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) in Hinxton, UK;
    o Amos Bairoch, Alexandre Gattiker, Karine Michoud, Isabelle Phan and
    Sandrine Pilbout at the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics in Geneva,
    Switzerland.

    Copyright Notice
    TrEMBL copyright (c) 2004 EMBL-EBI
    This manual and the database it accompanies may be copied and
    redistributed freely, without advance permission, provided
    that this copyright statement is reproduced with each copy.

    Citation

    If you want to cite TrEMBL in a publication please use
    the following reference:

    Apweiler R., Bairoch A., Wu C.H., Barker W.C., Boeckmann B., Ferro
    S., Gasteiger E., Huang H., Lopez R., Magrane M., Martin M.J.,
    Natale D.A., O'Donovan C., Redaschi N. and Yeh L.L.
    UniProt: the Universal Protein knowledgebase
    Nucleic Acids Res. 32: D115-D119 (2004)

    1. Introduction


    UniProtKB/TrEMBL is a computer-annotated protein sequence database
    complementing the Swiss-Prot Protein Knowledgebase. UniProtKB/TrEMBL contains
    the translations of all coding sequences (CDS) present in the
    EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ Nucleotide Sequence Databases and also protein
    sequences extracted from the literature or submitted to Swiss-Prot,
    which are not yet integrated into UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot. For all UniProtKB/TrEMBL entries, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot accession numbers have been assigned.

    2. Why a complement to UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot?

    The ongoing gene sequencing and mapping projects have dramatically
    increased the number of protein sequences to be incorporated into
    UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot. We do not want to dilute the quality standards of UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot by incorporating sequences without proper sequence analysis and
    annotation but we do want to make the sequences available as quickly as
    possible. UniProtKB/TrEMBL achieves this second goal, and is a major step in the
    process of speeding up subsequent upgrading of annotation to the standard
    UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot quality. To address the problem of redundancy, the translations
    of all coding sequences (CDS) in the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database
    already included in Swiss-Prot have been removed from UniProtKB/TrEMBL.


    3. The Release

    This UniProtKB/TrEMBL release has been produced in synch with Swiss-Prot release 43. It was created from the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database release 77 and
    updates until the 26-January-2004 and contains 1'069649 entries and
    335'331'748 amino acids.

    UniProtKB/TrEMBL is organized in subsections:

    arc.dat (Archaea): 1850 entries
    arp.dat (Complete Archaeal proteomes): 30436 entries
    fun.dat (Fungi): 26545 entries
    hum.dat (Human): 33713 entries
    inv.dat (Invertebrates): 116930 entries
    mam.dat (Other Mammals): 14217 entries
    mhc.dat (MHC proteins): 9401 entries
    org.dat (Organelles): 87676 entries
    phg.dat (Bacteriophages): 9349 entries
    pln.dat (Plants): 95077 entries
    pro.dat (Prokaryotes): 94217 entries
    prp.dat (Complete Prokaryotic Proteomes): 293602 entries
    rod.dat (Rodents): 42282 entries
    unc.dat (Unclassified): 456 entries
    vrl.dat (Viruses): 96447 entries
    vrt.dat (Other Vertebrates): 20986 entries
    vrv.dat (Retroviruses): 96465 entries

    67'168 new entries have been integrated in UniProtKB/TrEMBL. The sequences of
    2443 UniProtKB/TrEMBL entries have been updated and the annotation has been
    updated in 441'151 entries.

    In the document deleteac.txt, you will find a list of all accession numbers
    which were previously present in UniProtKB/TrEMBL, but which have now been deleted from
    the database.


    4. Format Differences Between UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and UniProtKB/TrEMBL

    The format and conventions used by UniProtKB/TrEMBL follow as closely as possible
    that of UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot. Hence, it is not necessary to produce an additional
    user manual and extensive release notes for UniProtKB/TrEMBL. The information given
    in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot release notes and user manual are in general valid for
    UniProtKB/TrEMBL. The differences are mentioned below.

    The general structure of an entry is identical in UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and UniProtKB/TrEMBL. The data class used in UniProtKB/TrEMBL (in the ID line) is always 'PRELIMINARY', whereas in UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot it is always 'STANDARD'.

    Differences in line types present in UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL:

    The ID line (IDentification):

    The entry name used in UniProtKB is the same as the Accession Number of the
    entry.


    The DT line (DaTe)

    The format of the DT lines that serve to indicate when an entry was
    created and updated are identical to that defined in UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot; but the
    DT lines in UniProtKB/TrEMBL refer to the UniProtKB/TrEMBL release. The difference is
    shown in the example below.

    DT lines in a UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot entry:

    DT 01-JAN-1988 (Rel. 06, Created)
    DT 01-JUL-1989 (Rel. 11, Last sequence update)
    DT 01-AUG-1992 (Rel. 23, Last annotation update)

    DT lines in a UniProtKB/TrEMBL entry:

    DT 01-NOV-1996 (UniProtKB/TrEMBLrel. 01, Created)
    DT 01-NOV-1999 (UniProtKB/TrEMBLrel. 12, Last sequence update)
    DT 01-MAR-2004 (UniProtKB/TrEMBLrel. 26, Last annotation update)

    5. Weekly updates of UniProtKB/TrEMBL and non-redundant data sets

    5.1 UniProtKB/TrEMBL updates

    Biweekly cumulative updates of TrEMBL are available by anonymous FTP and
    from the EBI SRS server.

    5.2 UniProtKB

    We also produce biweekly a complete non-redundant protein sequence
    collection by providing three compressed files: uniprot.sprot.dat.gz and
    uniprot.trembl.dat.gz are in /pub/databases/uniprot/knowledgebase and
    uniprot.trembl_new.dat.gz is in /pub/databases/uniprot/knowledgebase/new
    on the EBI ftp server.

    This set of non-redundant files is especially important for two types of
    users:
    (i) Managers of similarity search services. They can now provide what is
    currently the most comprehensive and non-redundant data set of protein
    sequences.
    (ii) Anybody wanting to update their full copy of UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot + UniProtKB/TrEMBL to their own schedule without having to wait for full releases of UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot or UniProtKB/TrEMBL (UniProtKB).

    5.3 XML

    A version of UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and UniProtKB/TrEMBL in XML format has been developed and is provided with this release. More information is available at
    http://www.ebi.uniprot.org/support/documents.shtml and the data can be
    downloaded from
    ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/uniprot/knowledgebase

    We would welcome any feedback from the user community.

    5.4 Varsplic Expand

    We also provide Varsplic Expand which is a program to generate
    " expanded" sequences from Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL records i.e. sequences
    including the variants specified by the varsplic, variant and conflict
    annotations. New records are produced in either pseudo-Swiss-Prot or
    FASTA format for each specified variant. More information and the data is
    available at ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/uniprot/knowledgebase

    6. Access/Data Distribution

    FTP server: ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl
    SRS server: http://srs.ebi.ac.uk/

    UniProtKB/TrEMBL is also available on the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot CD-ROM.
    UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot + UniProtKB/TrEMBL is searchable on the following servers at the EBI:

    FASTA3 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/fasta33/)
    BLAST2 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/blast2/)
    Scanps (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/scanps/)
    MPSrch (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/MPsrch/)

    For each UniProtKB/TrEMBL release, a synchronized version of the concurrent UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot release is distributed at ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl/swissprot/


    7. General announcements and Forthcoming changes

    7.1 What's new

    We have introduced new resources for users to enable us to communicate
    effectively between releases about what is new in UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and UniProtKB/TrEMBL and what is planned for the future.
    These are available at:
    http://us.expasy.org/sprot/relnotes/sp_news.html
    http://us.expasy.org/sprot/relnotes/sp_soon.html
      
