---
title: UniProt release 2.3
categories: release
---

# UniProtKB News

## New RL line structure for electronic publications

Electronic publications have been indicated in the RL line with the '(er)' prefix that stands for electronic resource:

    RL   (er) Free text.

Example:

    RL   (er) Plant Gene Register PGR98-023.

## Removal of the submission references to HIV data bank

We replaced all submission references to the HIV data bank by publications, thus RL lines of the type:

    RL   Submitted (XXX-YYYY) to the HIV data bank.

**do no longer exist** in Swiss-Prot.

## Change in cross-references to PDB

The structure determination method (X-ray, NMR, etc) as well as the mapping of the extent of the cross-reference on the sequence have been introduced as tertiary identifier to the PDB cross-reference line.

Former format:

    DR   PDB; ENTRY_NAME; REVISION_DATE.

**New format:**

    DR   PDB; ENTRY_NAME; Method; CHAIN[S]=RANGE.

The methods are controlled vocabulary and currently include:

-   X-ray (for X-ray crystallography)
-   NMR (for NMR spectroscopy)
-   EM (for electron microscopy and cryo-electron diffraction)
-   Fiber (for fiber diffraction)
-   IR (for infrared spectroscopy)
-   Model (for predicted models)
-   Neutron (for neutron diffraction)

Example:

    DR   PDB; 1NB3; X-ray; A/B/C/D=116-335, P/R/S/T=98-105.

The tertiary identifier indicates the chain(s) and the corresponding range, of which the structure has been determined. If the range is unknown, a dash is given rather than the range positions. Example:

    DR   PDB; 1IYJ; X-ray; B/D=-.

If the chains and the range is unknown, a dash is used. Example:

    DR   PDB; 1N12; X-ray; -.

With the introduction of the new format, DR PDB lines can become **longer than 75 characters** .
