---
title: TrEMBL release 27.0
type: releaseNotes
date: 2004-07-06
categories: tr-major
---

                         UniProt/TrEMBL Release Notes
                         Release 27, 5th July 2004

        EMBL Outstation
        European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)
        Wellcome Trust Genome Campus
        Hinxton
        Cambridge CB10 1SD
        United Kingdom

        Telephone: (+44 1223) 494 444
        Fax: (+44 1223) 494 468
        Electronic mail address: datalib@ebi.ac.uk/swissprot@ebi.ac.uk
        WWW server: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/

        Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB)
        Centre Medical Universitaire
        1, rue Michel Servet
        1211 Geneva 4
        Switzerland

        Telephone: (+41 22) 702 50 50
        Fax: (+41 22) 702 58 58
        Electronic mail address: swiss-prot@expasy.org
        WWW server: http://www.expasy.org/

        Protein Information Resource (PIR)
        Georgetown University Medical Center
        3900 Reservoir Road, NW
        Box 571455
        Washington, DC 20057-1455
        United States of America

        Telephone: (+1 202) 687 1039
        Fax: (+1 202) 687 0057)
        Electronic mail address: pirmail@georgetown.edu
        WWW server: http://pir.georgetown.edu


        Acknowledgements

        UniProt/TrEMBL has been prepared by:

        o  Claire O'Donovan, Maria Jesus Martin, Yasmin Alam-Faruque,
           Nicola Althorpe, Daniel Barrell, Wei mun Chan, Paul Browne,
           Kirill Degtyarenko, Ruth Eberhardt, Gill Fraser, Alexander
           Fedetov, Rodrigo Fernandez, John Garavelli, Andre Hackmann,
           Alan Horne, Julius Jacobsen, Alexander Kanapin, Youla
           Karavidopoulou, Paul Kersey, Ernst Kretschmann, Kati Laiho,
           Minna Lehvaslaiho, Michele Magrane, Virginie Mittard, Nicola
           Mulder, John F. O'Rourke, Sandra Orchard, Astrid Rakow,
           Mark Rynbeek, Sandra van den Broek, Eleanor Whitfield, Allyson
           Williams and Rolf Apweiler at the EMBL Outstation - European
           Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) in Hinxton, UK.
        o  Amos Bairoch, Alexandre Gattiker, Karine Michoud, Catherine
           Rivoire, Nicole Redaschi and Sandrine Pilbout at the Swiss
           Institute of Bioinformatics in Geneva, Switzerland.

        Copyright Notice

        UniProt/TrEMBL copyright (c) 2004 EMBL-EBI
        This manual and the database it accompanies may be copied and
        redistributed freely, without advance permission, provided
        that this copyright statement is reproduced with each copy.

        Citation

        If you want to cite UniProt/TrEMBL in a publication please use
        the following reference:

        Apweiler R., Bairoch A., Wu C.H., Barker W.C., Boeckmann B., Ferro
        S., Gasteiger E., Huang H., Lopez R., Magrane M., Martin M.J.,
        Natale D.A., O'Donovan C., Redaschi N. and Yeh L.L.
        UniProt: the Universal Protein knowledgebase
        Nucleic Acids Res. 32: D115-D119 (2004)

     1. Introduction


    UniProt/TrEMBL is a computer-annotated protein sequence database
    complementing the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database. Together they constitute
    the UniProt Knowledgebase. The DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank nucleotide sequence
    databases' CDS translations, the sequences of PDB structures, and
    directly sequenced peptides extracted from the literature or submitted
    directly to UniProt are used by default as the raw material for the
    UniProt Knowledgebase. However, some data from DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank including
    most of the Whole Genome Shotgun (WGS) data, CDS translations leading to
    small fragments or not coding for real proteins, synthetic sequences,
    non-germline Immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors, and most patent
    application sequences are actively excluded from the Knowledgebase.
    Having this data into the Knowledgebase would pollute the database
    with highly unstable and low-quality data. However, we do provide all
    publicly available protein sequences in the UniProt archive (UniParc)
    (http://www.uniprot.org/). UniParc sequences from other UniParc source
    records identified by the UniProt curators as important sequences
    missing in the Knowledgebase are also used to create new UniProt
    Knowledgebase records. This process ensures that the UniProt Knowledgebase
    is not missing any important sequences available in the protein sequence
    repositories, but minimises the amount of unstable and low quality data in
    the Knowledgebase.


     2. Why a complement to UniProt/Swiss-Prot?

    The ongoing gene sequencing and mapping projects have dramatically
    increased the number of protein sequences to be incorporated into
    UniProt/Swiss-Prot. We do not want to dilute the quality standards of
    UniProt/Swiss-Prot by incorporating sequences without proper sequence
    analysis and annotation but we do want to make the sequences available
    as quickly as possible. UniProt/TrEMBL achieves this goal and is a major
    step in the process of speeding up subsequent upgrading of annotation to
    the standard UniProt/Swiss-Prot quality.


     3. The Release

    This UniProt/TrEMBL release has been produced in synch with
    UniProt/Swiss-Prot release 44 and together they comprise the UniProt
    Knowledgebase release 2.0. It was created from the EMBL Nucleotide
    Sequence Database release 79 and updates until the 18-June-2004 and
    contains 1'333'917 entries and 413'323'560 amino acids.

    UniProt/TrEMBL is organized in subsections:

    arc.dat (Archaea):                          4245 entries
    arp.dat (Complete Archaeal proteomes):     33050 entries
    fun.dat (Fungi):                           41959 entries
    hum.dat (Human):                           49176 entries
    inv.dat (Invertebrates):                  147306 entries
    mam.dat (Other Mammals):                   18352 entries
    mhc.dat (MHC proteins):                    10528 entries
    org.dat (Organelles):                     112691 entries
    phg.dat (Bacteriophages):                  13750 entries
    pln.dat (Plants):                         116371 entries
    pro.dat (Prokaryotes):                    169966 entries
    prp.dat (Complete Prokaryotic Proteomes): 330392 entries
    rod.dat (Rodents):                         47097 entries
    unc.dat (Unclassified):                      963 entries
    vrl.dat (Viruses):                        124972 entries
    vrt.dat (Other Vertebrates):               30294 entries
    vrv.dat (Retroviruses):                   116571 entries

    275'585 new entries have been integrated in UniProt/TrEMBL.

    More statistics for the UniProt/TrEMBL release are available at
    http://www.ebi.ac.uk/trembl/

    In the document delac_tr.txt, you will find a list of all accession
    numbers which were previously present in UniProt/TrEMBL, but which
    have now been deleted from the database.


     4. Format differences between UniProt/Swiss-Prot and UniProt/TrEMBL

    The format and conventions used by UniProt/TrEMBL follow as closely
    as possible that of UniProt/Swiss-Prot. Hence, it is not necessary
    to produce an additional user manual and extensive release notes
    for UniProt/TrEMBL. The information given in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot
    release notes and user manual are in general valid for UniProt/TrEMBL.
    The differences are mentioned below.

    The general structure of an entry is identical in both databases.

    The data class used in UniProt/TrEMBL (in the ID line) is always
    'PRELIMINARY',whereas in UniProt/Swiss-Prot it is always 'STANDARD'.

    Differences in line types:

    The ID line (IDentification):

    The entry name used in UniProt/TrEMBL is the same as the Accession
    Number of the entry.

    The DT line (DaTe)

    The format of the DT lines that serve to indicate when an entry was
    created and updated are identical to that defined in UniProt/Swiss-Prot;
    but the DT lines in UniProt/TrEMBL refer to the UniProt/TrEMBL release.
    The difference is shown in the example below.

        DT lines in a UniProt/Swiss-Prot entry:

        DT   01-JAN-1988 (Rel. 06, Created)
        DT   01-JUL-1989 (Rel. 11, Last sequence update)
        DT   01-AUG-1992 (Rel. 23, Last annotation update)

        DT lines in a UniProt/TrEMBL entry:

        DT   01-NOV-1996 (TrEMBLrel. 01, Created)
        DT   01-NOV-1999 (TrEMBLrel. 12, Last sequence update)
        DT   01-MAR-2004 (TrEMBLrel. 26, Last annotation update)


     5. Bi-Weekly incremental UniProt Knowledgebase releases

    5.1 UniProt Knowledgebase

    In addition to full releases, we also provide biweekly two compressed
    files: uniprot.sprot.dat.gz and uniprot.trembl.dat.gz at
    http://www.uniprot.org/database/download.shtml allowing users access
    to the latest data.

    5.2 XML

    A version of the UniProt Knowledgebase in XML format has been developed
    and is provided with this release. More information is available at
    http://www.uniprot.org/support/documents.shtml and the data can be
    downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/database/download.shtml

    We would welcome any feedback from the user community.

    5.3 Varsplic Expand

    We also provide Varsplic Expand which is a program to generate
    "expanded" sequences from UniProt Knowledgebase records i.e. sequences
    including the variants specified by the varsplic, variant and conflict
    annotations. New records are produced in either pseudo-UniProt/Swiss-Prot
    or FASTA format for each specified variant. More information and the data
    is available at http://www.uniprot.org/database/download.shtml

     6. Access/Data Distribution


    The UniProt/TrEMBL release 27 is available at:
    ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/trembl


    The biweekly UniProt Knowledgebase release is available for searches and
    download from http://www.uniprot.org/database/download.shtml

    The UniProt Knowledgebase release is also available on CD-ROM from the EBI.


     7. General announcements and Forthcoming changes

    7.1 Recent and Forthcoming changes documentation for users

    We have introduced two new resources for users to enable us to communicate
    effectively between releases about what is new in the UniProt Knowledgebase
    and what is planned for the future.
    These are available at:
    http://www.uniprot.org/support/documents.shtml

    7.2 TrEMBL enhancements

    This release of TrEMBL has been produced from a new relational
    database system. This new system enables the biweekly synchronization of
    UniProt/TrEMBL with it's source EMBL/DDBJ/GenBank nucleotide sequence
    databases. It has also facilitated the integration of various bioinformatic
    tools to enhance the UniProt/TrEMBL annotation. As a result, this release of
    the database has significant annotation differences with regards to previous
    releases and we are committed to further raising the annotation standards.
    We welcome feedback from the user community.
